=head1 NAME

virt-v2v-support - Supported hypervisors, virtualization management
systems and guests in virt-v2v

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This page documents which foreign hypervisors, virtualization
management systems and guest types that L<virt-v2v(1)> can support.

For more information on supported hypervisors, and guest types in
RHEL, please consult the following Knowledgebase article on these
Red Hat Customer Portal:
L<https://access.redhat.com/articles/1351473>.

=head2 Guest firmware

BIOS is supported for all guest types and hypervisors.

VMware allows you to present UEFI firmware to guests (instead of the
ordinary PC BIOS).  Virt-v2v can convert these guests, but requires
that UEFI is supported by the target hypervisor.

Currently KVM supports OVMF, an open source UEFI firmware, and can run
these guests.

Since OVMF support was only recently added to KVM (in 2014/2015), not
all target environments support UEFI guests yet:

=over 4

=item UEFI on libvirt, qemu

Supported.  Virt-v2v will generate the correct libvirt XML (metadata)
automatically, but note that the same version of OVMF must be
installed on the conversion host as is installed on the target
hypervisor, else you will have to adjust paths in the metadata.

=item UEFI on OpenStack

Not supported.

=item UEFI on oVirt or RHV

Supported since oVirt/RHV E<ge> 4.2 and virt-v2v E<ge> 1.39.12.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virt-v2v(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2019 Red Hat Inc.
