=head1 NAME

virt-v2v-copy-to-local - Copy a remote guest to the local machine

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-v2v-copy-to-local -ic LIBVIRT_URI GUEST

 virt-v2v-copy-to-local -ic xen+ssh://root@xen.example.com xen_guest

 virt-v2v-copy-to-local -ic esx://root@esxi.example.com vmware_guest

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<virt-v2v-copy-to-local> copies a guest from a remote hypervisor to
the local machine, in preparation for conversion by L<virt-v2v(1)>.
Note this tool alone B<does not> do the virt-v2v conversion.

=head2 When to use this tool

This tool is not usually necessary, but there are a few special cases
(see list below) where you might need it.

If your case does not fit one of these special cases, then ignore this
tool and read L<virt-v2v(1)> instead.  The virt-v2v-copy-to-local
process is slower than using virt-v2v directly, because it has to copy
unused parts of the guest disk.

=over 4

=item *

You have a Xen guest using host block devices.  Virt-v2v cannot
convert such guests directly.

See L<virt-v2v(1)/XEN OR SSH CONVERSIONS FROM BLOCK DEVICES>.

=item *

You have VMware ESXi hypervisors, and are not using VMware vCenter to
manage them.  Virt-v2v cannot directly access ESXi hypervisor, so you
either have to export the guest as an OVA (eg. using VMware's
C<ovftool>); or you can use this tool to copy the guest to a local
file on the conversion server, from where virt-v2v will be able to
access it.

See L<virt-v2v(1)/INPUT FROM VMWARE ESXi HYPERVISOR>.

=back

=head2 How this tool works

This tool uses libvirt to get the libvirt XML (metadata) of the remote
guest, essentially equivalent to running C<virsh dumpxml guest>.

It then uses the XML to locate the remote guest disks, which are
copied over using a hypervisor-specific method.  It uses ssh for
remote Xen hypervisors, and HTTPS (curl) for remote ESXi hypervisors.

It then modifies the libvirt XML so that it points at the local copies
of the guest disks.

The libvirt XML is output to a file called F<guest.xml> (where
I<guest> is the name of the guest).  The disk(s) are output to file(s)
called F<guest-disk1>, F<guest-disk2> and so on.

After copying the guest locally, you can convert it using:

 virt-v2v -i libvirtxml guest.xml [-o options ...]

Virt-v2v finds the local copies of the disks by looking in the XML.

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Copy and convert from Xen hypervisor that uses host block devices

For full instructions, see
L<virt-v2v(1)/XEN OR SSH CONVERSIONS FROM BLOCK DEVICES>.

 virt-v2v-copy-to-local -ic xen+ssh://root@xen.example.com xen_guest
 virt-v2v -i libvirtxml xen_guest.xml -o local -os /var/tmp
 rm xen_guest.xml xen_guest-disk*

=head2 Copy and convert from ESXi hypervisor

For full instructions, see
L<virt-v2v(1)/INPUT FROM VMWARE ESXi HYPERVISOR>.

 virt-v2v-copy-to-local -ic esx://root@esxi.example.com?no_verify=1 vmware_guest
 virt-v2v -i libvirtxml vmware_guest.xml -o local -os /var/tmp
 rm vmware_guest.xml vmware_guest-disk*

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display help.

=item B<-ic> libvirtURI

Specify a libvirt connection URI

=item B<-ip> file

Instead of asking for password(s) interactively, pass the password
through a file.  Note the file should contain the whole password,
B<without any trailing newline>, and for security the file should have
mode C<0600> so that others cannot read it.

Currently this option does not have any effect on xen+ssh transfers,
but that is a bug.

=item B<-q>

=item B<--quiet>

This disables progress bars and other unnecessary output.

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose messages for debugging.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virt-v2v(1)>,
L<virsh(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<https://libvirt.org/uri.html>,
L<https://libvirt.org/remote.html>,
L<https://libvirt.org/drvesx.html>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2018 Red Hat Inc.
