=head1 NAME

virt-p2v-make-disk - Build the virt-p2v disk using virt-builder

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-p2v-make-disk -o /dev/sdX os-version

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<virt-p2v(1)> converts a physical machine to run virtualized on KVM,
managed by libvirt, OpenStack, oVirt, Red Hat Enterprise
Virtualisation (RHEV), or one of the other targets supported by
L<virt-v2v(1)>.

virt-p2v-make-disk is a script which creates a bootable disk image or
USB key containing virt-p2v.  It uses L<virt-builder(1)> to do this,
and is just a small shell script around virt-builder.

virt-p2v-make-disk has two required parameters:

The I<-o> parameter specifies where the output should go, for example
to a USB key (eg. C<-o /dev/sdX>) or to a file.  If you pass a device
name, then B<the existing contents of the device will be erased>.

The C<os-version> parameter is the base Linux distro to use for the
operating system on the ISO.  To list possible C<os-version>
combinations, do:

 virt-builder -l

=head2 EXAMPLES

Write a virt-p2v bootable USB key on F</dev/sdX> (and existing content
is erased), using Fedora 20 as the base distribution:

 virt-p2v-make-disk -o /dev/sdX fedora-20

Use a 32 bit Fedora environment, useful for converting older hardware
(note that 32 bit virt-p2v can convert 64 bit physical machines and
can interoperate with 64 bit virt-v2v and 64 bit hypervisors just
fine):

 virt-p2v-make-disk -o /dev/sdX --arch i686 fedora-20

Write a virt-p2v bootable virtual disk image, and boot it under qemu:

 virt-p2v-make-disk -o /var/tmp/p2v.img fedora-20
 qemu-kvm -m 1024 -boot c \
   -drive file=/var/tmp/p2v.img,if=virtio,index=0 \
   -drive file=/var/tmp/guest.img,if=virtio,index=1

where F</var/tmp/guest.img> would be the disk image of some guest that
you want to convert (for testing only).

=head1 ADDING AN SSH IDENTITY

You can inject an SSH identity (private key) file to the image using
the I<--inject-ssh-identity> option.

First create a key pair.  It must have an empty passphrase:

 ssh-keygen -t rsa -N '' -f id_rsa

This creates a private key (C<id_rsa>) and a public key
(C<id_rsa.pub>) pair.  The public key should be appended to the
C<authorized_keys> file on the virt-v2v conversion server (usually to
C</root/.ssh/authorized_keys>).

The private key should be injected into the disk image and then
discarded:

 virt-p2v-make-disk [...] --inject-ssh-identity id_rsa
 rm id_rsa

When booting virt-p2v, specify the URL of the injected file like this:

 │         User name: [root_____________________________] │
 │                                                        │
 │          Password: [    <leave this field blank>     ] │
 │                                                        │
 │  SSH Identity URL: [file:///var/tmp/id_rsa___________] │

or if using the kernel command line, add:

 p2v.identity=file:///var/tmp/id_rsa

For more information, see L<virt-p2v(1)/SSH IDENTITIES>.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display help.

=item B<--arch> ARCH

Set the architecture of the virt-p2v ISO.

This is most usefully set to I<--arch i686>, which builds a 32 bit
virt-p2v environment that will work on older hardware.  32 bit
virt-p2v can convert 64 bit physical machines and can interoperate
with 64 bit virt-v2v and 64 bit hypervisors, so there's no downside to
using this option.

If this option is not supplied, then the default is to use the same
architecture as the host that is running virt-p2v-make-disk.

=item B<--inject-ssh-identity> id_rsa

Add an SSH identity (private key) file into the image.
See L</ADDING AN SSH IDENTITY> above.

=item B<-o> OUTPUT

=item B<--output> OUTPUT

Write output to C<OUTPUT>, which can be a local file or block device.
B<The existing contents of the device will be erased>.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$libexecdir/virt-p2v>

The L<virt-p2v(1)> binary which is copied into the bootable disk
image.  The location of the binary can be changed by setting the
C<VIRT_P2V_DATA_DIR> environment variable.

=item F<$datadir/issue>

=item F<$datadir/launch-virt-p2v.in>

=item F<$datadir/p2v.service>

Various data files that are copied into the bootable disk image.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item C<VIRT_P2V_DATA_DIR>

The directory where virt-p2v-make-disk looks for data files (see
L</FILES> above).  If not set, a compiled-in location is used.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virt-p2v(1)>,
L<virt-p2v-make-kickstart(1)>,
L<virt-v2v(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2016 Red Hat Inc.
