=head1 NAME

virt-p2v-make-kickstart - Build the virt-p2v kickstart

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-p2v-make-kickstart [-o p2v.ks] [--proxy=http://...] repo [repo...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<virt-p2v(1)> converts a physical machine to run virtualized on KVM,
managed by libvirt, OpenStack, oVirt, Red Hat Enterprise
Virtualisation (RHEV), or one of the other targets supported by
L<virt-v2v(1)>.

Kickstart is a format used by Red Hat-derived distributions (such as
Fedora, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, CentOS, Scientific Linux, and
others) to describe how to make live CDs, install the distro, make
"Spins" and so on.  It is driven by a kickstart file.

virt-p2v-make-kickstart builds a kickstart file which can be used to
build a bootable P2V ISO, live CD, USB key, or PXE image.  This tool
only builds the kickstart file, but this manual page describes some of
the ways you can use the kickstart file.

=head1 BUILDING THE KICKSTART FILE

Using virt-p2v-make-kickstart is very simple:

 virt-p2v-make-kickstart fedora

will build a kickstart file for Fedora.  The kickstart file will be
called F<p2v.ks> and located in the current directory.

The parameters are a list of one or more repositories.  Some built-in
repositories are available: C<fedora>, C<rawhide>, C<koji> or
C<rhel-VERSION> (eg. C<rhel-7.1>).  You can also use a URL as a
parameter to point to a repository, for example:

 virt-p2v-make-kickstart https://dl.fedoraproject.org/pub/fedora/linux/releases/21/Everything/x86_64/os/

To control the name of the output file, use the I<-o> parameter.  To
tell kickstart to use a proxy server or web cache to download files,
use the I<--proxy> parameter.

=head1 BUILDING A LIVE CD / ISO

Once you have the kickstart file, you can use L<livecd-creator(8)>
to make a live CD:

 sudo livecd-creator p2v.ks

Before running this note that you should probably run
C<livecd-creator> in a disposable virtual machine for these reasons:

=over 4

=item *

You have to disable SELinux when running the tool.

=item *

This tool has to be run as root, and has some nasty failure modes.

=item *

You can only create the exact same Live CD distro as the host
distro.  Cross-builds will fail in strange ways (eg. RHBZ#1092327).

=back

=head1 BUILDING A FEDORA SPIN USING KOJI

This requires C<spin-livecd> permissions on Koji, which are not given
out usually, even to Fedora packagers.  However assuming you have been
given these permissions (or have your own Koji instance, I guess),
then you can do:

 koji spin-livecd [--scratch] virt-p2v 1.XX.YY rawhide x86_64 p2v.ks

=over 4

=item *

Add the C<--scratch> option to do a scratch build (recommended for
testing).

=item *

C<1.XX.YY> should match the libguestfs version

=item *

Instead of C<rawhide> you can use any Koji target.

=back

=head1 BUILDING A BOOTABLE USB KEY

Use the L<livecd-iso-to-disk(8)> program to convert the ISO created
above to a USB key:

 sudo livecd-iso-to-disk livecd-p2v.iso /dev/sdX

=head1 BUILDING A PXE BOOT IMAGE

Use the C<livecd-iso-to-pxeboot> program to convert the ISO created
above to a PXE boot image.

 sudo livecd-iso-to-pxeboot livecd-p2v.iso

This creates a C<tftpboot> subdirectory under the current directory
containing the files required to PXE boot virt-p2v:

 $ ls -1R tftpboot/
 tftpboot/:
 initrd0.img
 pxelinux.0
 pxelinux.cfg/
 vmlinuz0
 
 tftpboot/pxelinux.cfg:
 default

=head1 32 OR 64 BIT VIRT-P2V?

Virt-p2v can convert any 32 or 64 bit guest, regardless of whether
virt-p2v itself is built as a 32 or 64 bit binary.  The only
restriction is that 64 bit virt-p2v cannot run on 32 bit hardware.

Old virt-p2v 0.9 was always built as a 32 bit (i686) ISO.  This meant
that the CD could be booted on any 32- or 64-bit i686 or x86-64
hardware, and could convert any guest.  The old virt-p2v ISO shipped
by Red Hat was based on Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 6.

Since RHEL 7 dropped support for 32 bit machines, current virt-p2v on
RHEL can only be built for 64 bit.  It cannot run on old 32 bit only
hardware.

Fedora virt-p2v ISOs are generally built for 32 bit, so like the old
RHEL 6-based virt-p2v 0.9 they can boot on any hardware.

=head1 TESTING VIRT-P2V USING QEMU

=head2 TESTING THE P2V ISO USING QEMU

You can use qemu to test-boot the P2V ISO:

 qemu-kvm -m 1024 -hda /tmp/guest.img -cdrom /tmp/livecd-p2v.iso -boot d

Note that C<-hda> is the (virtual) system that you want to convert
(for test purposes).  It could be any guest type supported by
L<virt-v2v(1)>, including Windows or Red Hat Enterprise Linux.

=head2 TESTING PXE SUPPORT USING QEMU

=over 4

=item *

Unpack the tftpboot directory into F</tmp> (so it appears as
F</tmp/tftpboot>).

=item *

Copy F<pxelinux.0> and F<ldlinux.c32> from syslinux (usually from
F</usr/share/syslinux>) into F</tmp/tftpboot>.

=item *

Adjust the C<APPEND> line in F</tmp/tftpboot/pxelinux.cfg/default> if
required.  See L<virt-p2v(1)/KERNEL COMMAND LINE CONFIGURATION>.

=item *

Run qemu like this so that it acts as a TFTP and BOOTP server,
emulating a netboot:

 qemu-kvm \
     -m 4096 -hda /tmp/guest.img \
     -boot n \
     -netdev user,id=unet,tftp=/tmp/tftpboot,bootfile=/pxelinux.0 \
     -device virtio-net-pci,netdev=unet \
     -serial stdio

Note that this requires considerably more memory because the PXE image
is loaded into memory.  Also that qemu's TFTP server is very slow and
the virt-p2v PXE image is very large, so it can appear to "hang" after
pxelinux starts up.

=back

=head1 ADDING EXTRA PACKAGES

You can install extra packages using the I<--install> option.  This
can be useful for making a more fully-featured virt-p2v disk with
extra tools for debugging and troubleshooting.  Give a list of
packages, separated by commas.  For example:

 virt-p2v-make-kickstart [...] --install tcpdump,traceroute

=head1 ADDING AN SSH IDENTITY

You can inject an SSH identity (private key) file to the kickstart and
hence into the ISO using the I<--inject-ssh-identity> option.  Note
that you I<cannot> inject a key once the ISO has been built.

First create a key pair.  It must have an empty passphrase:

 ssh-keygen -t rsa -N '' -f id_rsa

This creates a private key (C<id_rsa>) and a public key
(C<id_rsa.pub>) pair.  The public key should be appended to the
C<authorized_keys> file on the virt-v2v conversion server (usually to
C</root/.ssh/authorized_keys>).

The private key should be added to the kickstart file and then
discarded:

 virt-p2v-make-kickstart [...] --inject-ssh-identity id_rsa
 rm id_rsa

The ISO can then be built from the kickstart in the usual way (see
above), and it will contain the embedded SSH identity
(F</var/tmp/id_rsa>).

When booting virt-p2v, specify the URL of the injected file like this:

 │         User name: [root_____________________________] │
 │                                                        │
 │          Password: [    <leave this field blank>     ] │
 │                                                        │
 │  SSH Identity URL: [file:///var/tmp/id_rsa___________] │

or if using the kernel command line, add:

 p2v.identity=file:///var/tmp/id_rsa

For more information, see L<virt-p2v(1)/SSH IDENTITIES>.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display help.

=item B<--inject-ssh-identity> id_rsa

Add an SSH identity (private key) file into the kickstart.
See L</ADDING AN SSH IDENTITY> above.

=item B<--install> pkg,pkg,...

Add extra packages to the kickstart C<%packages> section.
See L</ADDING EXTRA PACKAGES> above.

=item B<-o> OUTPUT

=item B<--output> OUTPUT

Write kickstart to C<OUTPUT>.  If not specified, the default is
F<p2v.ks> in the current directory.

=item B<--proxy> URL

Tell the kickstart to use a proxy server or web cache for downloads.

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose output.  Use this if you need to debug problems with
the script or if you are filing a bug.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=back

=head1 FILES

=over 4

=item F<$libexecdir/virt-p2v>

The L<virt-p2v(1)> binary which is copied into the kickstart file.

The location of the binary can be changed by setting the
C<VIRT_P2V_DATA_DIR> environment variable.

=item F<$datadir/virt-p2v/issue>

=item F<$datadir/virt-p2v/launch-virt-p2v.in>

=item F<$datadir/virt-p2v/p2v.ks.in>

=item F<$datadir/virt-p2v/p2v.service>

Various data files that are used to make the kickstart.

The location of these files can be changed by setting the
C<VIRT_P2V_DATA_DIR> environment variable.

=back

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

=over 4

=item C<VIRT_P2V_DATA_DIR>

The directory where virt-p2v-make-kickstart looks for data files and
the virt-p2v binary (see L</FILES> above).  If not set, a compiled-in
location is used.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virt-p2v(1)>,
L<virt-p2v-make-disk(1)>,
L<virt-v2v(1)>,
L<livecd-creator(8)>,
L<livecd-iso-to-disk(8)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2016 Red Hat Inc.
