=head1 NAME

virt-p2v - Convert a physical machine to use KVM

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-p2v

 virt-p2v.iso

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Virt-p2v converts a physical machine to run virtualized on KVM,
managed by libvirt or Red Hat Enterprise Virtualisation (RHEV) version
2.2 or later.

Normally you don't run the virt-p2v program directly.  Instead you
have to boot the physical machine using the bootable CD-ROM, ISO or
PXE image.  This bootable image contains the virt-p2v binary and runs
it automatically.  This manual page documents both the binary and the
bootable image.

=head1 NETWORK SETUP

Virt-p2v runs on the physical machine which you want to convert.  It
has to talk to another server called the "conversion server" which
must have L<virt-v2v(1)> installed on it.  It always talks to the
conversion server over SSH:

 ┌──────────────┐                  ┌─────────────────┐
 │ virt-p2v     │                  │ virt-v2v        │
 │ (physical    │  ssh connection  │ (conversion     │
 │  server)   ╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍╍▶ server)       │
 └──────────────┘                  └─────────────────┘

The virt-v2v program on the conversion server does the actual
conversion (physical to virtual, and virtual to virtual conversions
are sufficiently similar that we use the same program to do both).

The SSH connection is always initiated from the physical server.  All
data is transferred over the SSH connection.  In terms of firewall and
network configuration, you only need to ensure that the physical
server has access to a port (usually TCP port 22) on the conversion
server.  (Note that the physical machine may reconnect several times
during the conversion process.)

The conversion server does not need to be a physical machine.  It
could be a virtual machine, as long as it has sufficient memory and
disk space to do the conversion, and as long as the physical machine
can connect directly to its SSH port.

Because all of the data on the physical server's hard drive(s) has to
be copied over the network, the speed of conversion is largely
determined by the speed of the network between the two machines.

=head1 GUI INTERACTIVE CONFIGURATION

When you start virt-p2v, you'll see a graphical configuration dialog
that walks you through connection to the conversion server, asks for
the password, which local hard disks you want to convert, and other
things like the name of the guest to create and the number of virtual
CPUs to give it.

=head1 KERNEL COMMAND LINE CONFIGURATION

If you don't want to configure things using the graphical UI, an
alternative is to configure through the kernel command line.  This is
especially convenient if you are converting a lot of physical machines
which are booted using PXE.

Where exactly you set command line arguments depends on your PXE
implementation, but for pxelinux you put them in the C<APPEND> field
in the C<pxelinux.cfg> file.  For example:

 DEFAULT p2v
 TIMEOUT 20
 PROMPT 0
 LABEL p2v
   KERNEL virt-p2v-vmlinuz
   APPEND initrd=virt-p2v-initrd p2v.server=conv.example.com p2v.password=secret p2v.output=libvirt

You have to set some or all of the following command line arguments:

=over 4

=item B<p2v.server=SERVER>

The name or IP address of the conversion server.

This is always required if you are using the kernel configuration
method.  If virt-p2v does not find this on the kernel command line
then it switches to the GUI (interactive) configuration method.

=item B<p2v.port=NN>

The SSH port number on the conversion server (default: C<22>).

=item B<p2v.username=USERNAME>

The SSH username that we log in as on the conversion server
(default: C<root>).

=item B<p2v.password=PASSWORD>

The SSH password that we use to log in to the conversion server.

The default is to try with no password.  If this fails then virt-p2v
will ask the user to type the password (probably several times during
conversion).

Note that virt-p2v does not support authentication using key
distribution at this time.

=item B<p2v.sudo>

Use C<p2v.sudo> to tell virt-p2v to use L<sudo(8)> to gain root
privileges on the conversion server after logging in as a non-root
user (default: do not use sudo).

=item B<p2v.name=GUESTNAME>

The name of the guest that is created.  The default is to try to
derive a name from the physical machine's hostname (if possible) else
use a randomly generated name.

=item B<p2v.vcpus=NN>

The number of virtual CPUs to give to the guest.  The default is to
use the same as the number of physical CPUs.

=item B<p2v.memory=NN(M|G)>

The size of the guest memory.  You can specify this in megabytes or
gigabytes by using (eg) C<p2v.memory=1024M> or C<p2v.memory=1G>.  The
default is to use the same amount of RAM as on the physical machine.

=item B<p2v.debug>

Use this to enable full debugging of virt-v2v.

If asked to diagnose a problem with virt-p2v, you should add
C<p2v.debug> to the kernel command line, and examine the log file
which is left in C</tmp> on the conversion server.

=item B<p2v.disks=sdX,sdY,..>

A list of physical hard disks to convert, for example:

 p2v.disks=sda,sdc

The default is to convert all local hard disks that are found.

=item B<p2v.removable=srX,srY,..>

A list of removable media to convert.  The default is to create
virtual removable devices for every physical removable device found.
Note that the content of removable media is never copied over.

=item B<p2v.interfaces=em1,..>

A list of network interfaces to convert.  The default is to create
virtual network interfaces for every physical network interface found.

=item B<p2v.output=[libvirt|local|...]>

Set the output mode.  This is the same as the virt-v2v I<-o> option.
See L<virt-v2v(1)/OPTIONS>.

If not specified, the default is C<local>, and the converted guest is
written to C</var/tmp>.

=item B<p2v.output_allocation=sparse|preallocated>

Set the output allocation mode.  This is the same as the virt-v2v
I<-oa> option.  See L<virt-v2v(1)/OPTIONS>.

=item B<p2v.output_format=raw|sparse|...>

Set the output format.  This is the same as the virt-v2v I<-oa>
option.  See L<virt-v2v(1)/OPTIONS>.

=item B<p2v.output_storage=...>

Set the output storage.  This is the same as the virt-v2v I<-os>
option.  See L<virt-v2v(1)/OPTIONS>.

If not specified, the default is C</var/tmp> (on the conversion server).

=item B<ip=dhcp>

Use DHCP for configuring the network interface (this is the default).

=begin comment

=item B<ip=ADDR:GATEWAY:NETMASK>

Set up a static IPv4 network configuration.

=end comment

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display help.

=item B<--cmdline=CMDLINE>

This is used for debugging. Instead of parsing the kernel command line
from C</proc/cmdline>, parse the string parameter C<CMDLINE>.

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable debugging (on the conversion server).

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<virt-v2v(1)>,
L<qemu-nbd(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

Matthew Booth

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2014 Red Hat Inc.
