=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

libguestfs-test-tool - End user tests for libguestfs

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 libguestfs-test-tool [--options]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

libguestfs-test-tool is a test program shipped with libguestfs to end
users and developers, to allow them to check basic libguestfs
functionality is working.  This is needed because libguestfs
occasionally breaks for reasons beyond our control: usually because of
changes in the underlying qemu or kernel packages, or the host
environment.

If you suspect a problem in libguestfs, then just run:

 libguestfs-test-tool

It will print lots of diagnostic messages.

If it runs to completion successfully, you will see this near the end:

 ===== TEST FINISHED OK =====

and the test tool will exit with code 0.

If it fails (and/or exits with non-zero error code), please paste the
B<complete, unedited> output of the test tool into a bug report.  More
information about reporting bugs can be found on the
L<http://libguestfs.org/> website.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item I<--help>

Display short usage information and exit.

=item I<--qemu qemu_binary>

If you have downloaded another qemu binary, point this option at the
full path of the binary to try it.

=item I<--qemudir qemu_source_dir>

If you have compiled qemu from source, point this option at the source
directory to try it.

=item I<--timeout N>

Set the launch timeout to C<N> seconds.  The default is 120 seconds
which does not usually need to be adjusted unless your machine is very
slow.

=back

=head1 TRYING OUT A DIFFERENT VERSION OF QEMU

If you have compiled another version of qemu from source and would
like to try that, then you can use the I<--qemudir> option to point to
the qemu source directory.

If you have downloaded a qemu binary from somewhere, use the I<--qemu>
option to point to the binary.

When using an alternate qemu with libguestfs, usually you would need
to write a qemu wrapper script (see section I<QEMU WRAPPERS> in
L<guestfs(3)>).  libguestfs-test-tool writes a temporary qemu wrapper
script when you use either of the I<--qemudir> or I<--qemu> options.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

libguestfs-test-tool returns I<0> if the tests completed without
error, or I<1> if there was an error.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

For the full list of environment variables which may affect
libguestfs, please see the L<guestfs(3)> manual page.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<http://qemu.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2011 Red Hat Inc.
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
