=head1 NAME

virt-get-kernel - Extract kernel and ramdisk from guests

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-get-kernel [--options] -d domname

 virt-get-kernel [--options] -a disk.img

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This option extracts the kernel and initramfs from a guest.

The format of the disk image is automatically detected unless you
specify it by using the I<--format> option.

In the case where the guest contains multiple kernels, the one with
the highest version number is chosen.  To extract arbitrary kernels
from the disk image, see L<guestfish(1)>.  To extract the entire
C</boot> directory of a guest, see L<virt-copy-out(1)>.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display help.

=item B<-a> file

=item B<--add> file

Add I<file> which should be a disk image from a virtual machine.

The format of the disk image is auto-detected.  To override this and
force a particular format use the I<--format> option.

=item B<-a> URI

=item B<--add> URI

Add a remote disk.  The URI format is compatible with guestfish.
See L<guestfish(1)/ADDING REMOTE STORAGE>.

=item B<--colors>

=item B<--colours>

Use ANSI colour sequences to colourize messages.  This is the default
when the output is a tty.  If the output of the program is redirected
to a file, ANSI colour sequences are disabled unless you use this
option.

=item B<-c> URI

=item B<--connect> URI

If using libvirt, connect to the given I<URI>.  If omitted, then we
connect to the default libvirt hypervisor.

If you specify guest block devices directly (I<-a>), then libvirt is
not used at all.

=item B<-d> guest

=item B<--domain> guest

Add all the disks from the named libvirt guest.  Domain UUIDs can be
used instead of names.

=item B<--format> raw|qcow2|..

=item B<--format> auto

The default for the I<-a> option is to auto-detect the format of the
disk image.  Using this forces the disk format for the I<-a> option
on the command line.

If you have untrusted raw-format guest disk images, you should use
this option to specify the disk format.  This avoids a possible
security problem with malicious guests (CVE-2010-3851).

=item B<--machine-readable>

This option is used to make the output more machine friendly
when being parsed by other programs.  See
L</MACHINE READABLE OUTPUT> below.

=item B<-o> directory

=item B<--output> directory

This option specifies the output directory where kernel and initramfs
from the guest are written.

If not specified, the default output is the current directory.

=item B<--prefix> prefix

This option specifies a prefix for the extracted files.

If a prefix is specified, then there will be a dash (C<->) after the
prefix and before the rest of the file name; for example, a kernel
in the guest like C<vmlinuz-3.19.0-20-generic> is saved as
C<mydistro-vmlinuz-3.19.0-20-generic> when the prefix is C<mydistro>.

See also I<--unversioned-names>.

=item B<-q>

=item B<--quiet>

Don't print ordinary progress messages.

=item B<--unversioned-names>

This option affects the destination file name of extracted files.

If enabled, files will be saved locally just with the base name;
for example, kernel and ramdisk in the guest like
C<vmlinuz-3.19.0-20-generic> and C<initrd.img-3.19.0-20-generic>
are saved respectively as C<vmlinuz> and C<initrd.img>.

See also I<--prefix>.

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose messages for debugging.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=item B<-x>

Enable tracing of libguestfs API calls.

=back

=head1 MACHINE READABLE OUTPUT

The I<--machine-readable> option can be used to make the output more
machine friendly, which is useful when calling virt-get-kernel from
other programs, GUIs etc.

Use the option on its own to query the capabilities of the
virt-get-kernel binary.  Typical output looks like this:

 $ virt-get-kernel --machine-readable
 virt-get-kernel

A list of features is printed, one per line, and the program exits
with status 0.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES

For other environment variables which affect all libguestfs programs,
see L<guestfs(3)/ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES>.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

This program returns 0 if successful, or non-zero if there was an
error.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<guestmount(1)>,
L<virt-copy-out(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2013-2016 Red Hat Inc.
