=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

virt-filesystems - List filesystems, partitions, block devices, LVM in a virtual machine or disk image

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-filesystems [--options] -d domname

 virt-filesystems [--options] -a disk.img [-a disk.img ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This tool allows you to discover filesystems, partitions, logical
volumes, and their sizes in a disk image or virtual machine.  It is a
replacement for L<virt-list-filesystems(1)> and
L<virt-list-partitions(1)>.

One use for this tool is from shell scripts to iterate over all
filesystems from a disk image:

 for fs in $(virt-filesystems -a disk.img); do
   # ...
 done

Another use is to list partitions before using another tool to modify
those partitions (such as L<virt-resize(1)>).  If you are curious
about what an unknown disk image contains, use this tool along with
L<virt-inspector(1)>.

Various command line options control what this program displays.  You
need to give either I<-a> or I<-d> options to specify the disk image
or libvirt guest respectively.  If you just specify that then the
program shows filesystems found, one per line, like this:

 $ virt-filesystems -a disk.img
 /dev/sda1
 /dev/vg_guest/lv_root

If you add I<-l> or I<--long> then the output includes extra
information:

 $ virt-filesystems -a disk.img -l
 Name                   Type         VFS   Label  Size
 /dev/sda1              filesystem   ext4  boot   524288000
 /dev/vg_guest/lv_root  filesystem   ext4  root   10212081664

If you add I<--extra> then non-mountable (swap, unknown) filesystems
are shown as well:

 $ virt-filesystems -a disk.img --extra
 /dev/sda1
 /dev/vg_guest/lv_root
 /dev/vg_guest/lv_swap
 /dev/vg_guest/lv_data

If you add I<--partitions> then partitions are shown instead of filesystems:

 $ virt-filesystems -a disk.img --partitions
 /dev/sda1
 /dev/sda2

Similarly you can use I<--logical-volumes>, I<--volume-groups>,
I<--physical-volumes>, I<--block-devices> to list those items.

You can use these options in combination as well (if you want a
combination including filesystems, you have to add I<--filesystems>).
Notice that some items fall into several categories (eg. C</dev/sda1>
might be both a partition and a filesystem).  These items are listed
several times.  To get a list which includes absolutely everything
that virt-filesystems knows about, use the I<--all> option.

UUIDs (because they are quite long) are not shown by default.  Add the
I<--uuid> option to display device and filesystem UUIDs in the long
output.

I<--all --long --uuid> is a useful combination to display all possible
information about everything.

 $ virt-filesystems -a win.img --all --long --uuid -h
 Name      Type       VFS  Label           Size Parent   UUID
 /dev/sda1 filesystem ntfs System Reserved 100M -        F81C92571C92112C
 /dev/sda2 filesystem ntfs -               20G  -        F2E8996AE8992E3B
 /dev/sda1 partition  -    -               100M /dev/sda -
 /dev/sda2 partition  -    -               20G  /dev/sda -
 /dev/sda  device     -    -               20G  -        -

For machine-readable output, use I<--csv> to get Comma-Separated Values.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<--help>

Display brief help.

=item B<-a> file

=item B<--add> file

Add I<file> which should be a disk image from a virtual machine.  If
the virtual machine has multiple block devices, you must supply all of
them with separate I<-a> options.

The format of the disk image is auto-detected.  To override this and
force a particular format use the I<--format=..> option.

=item B<--all>

Display everything.  This is currently the same as specifying these
options: I<--filesystems>, I<--extra>, I<--partitions>,
I<--block-devices>, I<--logical-volumes>, I<--volume-groups>,
I<--physical-volumes>.  (More may be added to this list in future).

See also I<--long>.

=item B<--blkdevs>

=item B<--block-devices>

Display block devices.

=item B<-c> URI

=item B<--connect> URI

If using libvirt, connect to the given I<URI>.  If omitted, then we
connect to the default libvirt hypervisor.

If you specify guest block devices directly (I<-a>), then libvirt is
not used at all.

=item B<--csv>

Write out the results in CSV format (comma-separated values).  This
format can be imported easily into databases and spreadsheets, but
read L</NOTE ABOUT CSV FORMAT> below.

=item B<-d> guest

=item B<--domain> guest

Add all the disks from the named libvirt guest.  Domain UUIDs can be
used instead of names.

=item B<--echo-keys>

When prompting for keys and passphrases, virt-filesystems normally
turns echoing off so you cannot see what you are typing.  If you are
not worried about Tempest attacks and there is no one else in the room
you can specify this flag to see what you are typing.

=item B<--extra>

This causes filesystems that are not ordinary, mountable filesystems
to be displayed.  This category includes swapspace, and filesystems
that are empty or contain unknown data.

This option implies I<--filesystems>.

=item B<--filesystems>

Display mountable filesystems.  If no display option was selected then
this option is implied.

With I<--extra>, non-mountable filesystems are shown too.

=item B<--format=raw|qcow2|..>

=item B<--format>

The default for the I<-a> option is to auto-detect the format of the
disk image.  Using this forces the disk format for I<-a> options which
follow on the command line.  Using I<--format> with no argument
switches back to auto-detection for subsequent I<-a> options.

For example:

 virt-filesystems --format=raw -a disk.img

forces raw format (no auto-detection) for C<disk.img>.

 virt-filesystems --format=raw -a disk.img --format -a another.img

forces raw format (no auto-detection) for C<disk.img> and reverts to
auto-detection for C<another.img>.

If you have untrusted raw-format guest disk images, you should use
this option to specify the disk format.  This avoids a possible
security problem with malicious guests (CVE-2010-3851).

=item B<-h>

=item B<--human-readable>

In I<--long> mode, display sizes in human-readable format.

=item B<--keys-from-stdin>

Read key or passphrase parameters from stdin.  The default is
to try to read passphrases from the user by opening C</dev/tty>.

=item B<-l>

=item B<--long>

Display extra columns of data ("long format").

A title row is added unless you also specify I<--no-title>.

The extra columns displayed depend on what output you select, and the
ordering of columns may change in future versions.  Use the title row,
I<--csv> output and/or L<csvtool(1)> to match columns to data in
external programs.

Use I<-h> if you want sizes to be displayed in human-readable format.
The default is to show raw numbers of I<bytes>.

Use I<--uuid> to display UUIDs too.

=item B<--lvs>

=item B<--logvols>

=item B<--logical-volumes>

Display LVM logical volumes.  In this mode, these are displayed
irrespective of whether the LVs contain filesystems.

=item B<--no-title>

In I<--long> mode, don't add a title row.

Note that the order of the columns is not fixed, and may change in
future versions of virt-filesystems, so using this option may give you
unexpected surprises.

=item B<--parts>

=item B<--partitions>

Display partitions.  In this mode, these are displayed
irrespective of whether the partitions contain filesystems.

=item B<--pvs>

=item B<--physvols>

=item B<--physical-volumes>

Display LVM physical volumes.

=item B<--uuid>

=item B<--uuids>

In I<--long> mode, display UUIDs as well.

=item B<-v>

=item B<--verbose>

Enable verbose messages for debugging.

=item B<-V>

=item B<--version>

Display version number and exit.

=item B<--vgs>

=item B<--volgroups>

=item B<--volume-groups>

Display LVM volume groups.

=item B<-x>

Enable tracing of libguestfs API calls.

=back

=head1 COLUMNS

Note that columns in the output are subject to reordering and change
in future versions of this tool.

=over 4

=item B<Name>

The filesystem, partition, block device or LVM name.

For device and partition names these are displayed as canonical
libguestfs names, so that for example C</dev/sda2> is the second
partition on the first device.

If the I<--long> option is B<not> specified, then only the name column
is shown in the output.

=item B<Type>

The object type, for example C<filesystem>, C<lv>, C<device> etc.

=item B<VFS>

If there is a filesystem, then this column displays the filesystem
type if one could be detected, eg. C<ext4>.

=item B<Label>

If the object has a label (used for identifying and mounting
filesystems) then this column contains the label.

=item B<MBR>

The partition type byte, displayed as a two digit hexadecimal number.
A comprehensive list of partition types can be found here:
L<http://www.win.tue.nl/~aeb/partitions/partition_types-1.html>

This is only applicable for DOS (MBR) partitions.

=item B<Size>

The size of the object in bytes.  If the I<--human> option is used
then the size is displayed in a human-readable form.

=item B<Parent>

The parent column records the parent relationship between objects.

For example, if the object is a partition, then this column contains
the name of the containing device.  If the object is a logical volume,
then this column is the name of the volume group.

If there is more than one parent, then this column is (internal to the
column) a comma-separated list, eg. C</dev/sda,/dev/sdb>.

=item B<UUID>

If the object has a UUID (used for identifying and mounting
filesystems and block devices) then this column contains the UUID as a
string.

The UUID is only displayed if the I<--uuid> option is given.

=back

=head1 NOTE ABOUT CSV FORMAT

Comma-separated values (CSV) is a deceptive format.  It I<seems> like
it should be easy to parse, but it is definitely not easy to parse.

Myth: Just split fields at commas.  Reality: This does I<not> work
reliably.  This example has two columns:

 "foo,bar",baz

Myth: Read the file one line at a time.  Reality: This does I<not>
work reliably.  This example has one row:

 "foo
 bar",baz

For shell scripts, use C<csvtool> (L<http://merjis.com/developers/csv>
also packaged in major Linux distributions).

For other languages, use a CSV processing library (eg. C<Text::CSV>
for Perl or Python's built-in csv library).

Most spreadsheets and databases can import CSV directly.

=head1 SHELL QUOTING

Libvirt guest names can contain arbitrary characters, some of which
have meaning to the shell such as C<#> and space.  You may need to
quote or escape these characters on the command line.  See the shell
manual page L<sh(1)> for details.

=head1 EXIT STATUS

This program returns 0 if successful, or non-zero if there was an
error.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<virt-cat(1)>,
L<virt-df(1)>,
L<virt-list-filesystems(1)>,
L<virt-list-partitions(1)>,
L<csvtool(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2010 Red Hat Inc.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
