=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

guestfs-faq - libguestfs Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

=head1 ABOUT LIBGUESTFS

=head2 What is libguestfs?

libguestfs is a way to create, access and modify disk images.  You can
look inside disk images, modify the files they contain, create them
from scratch, resize them, and much more.  It's especially useful from
scripts and programs and from the command line.

libguestfs is a C library (hence "lib-"), and a set of tools built on
this library, and a set of bindings in many different programming
languages.

For more information about what libguestfs can do read the
introduction on the home page (L<http://libguestfs.org>).

=head2 What are the virt tools?

Virt tools (website: L<http://virt-tools.org>) are a whole set of
virtualization management tools aimed at system administrators.  Some
of them come from libguestfs, some from libvirt and many others from
other open source projects.  So virt tools is a superset of
libguestfs.  However libguestfs comes with many important tools.  See
L<http://libguestfs.org> for a full list.

=head2 Does libguestfs need { libvirt / KVM / Red Hat / Fedora }?

No!

libvirt is not a requirement for libguestfs.

libguestfs works with any disk image, including ones created in
VMware, KVM, qemu, VirtualBox, Xen, and many other hypervisors, and
ones which you have created from scratch.

Red Hat sponsors (ie. pays for) development of libguestfs and a huge
number of other open source projects.  But you can run libguestfs and
the virt tools on many different Linux distros and Mac OS X.  Some
virt tools have been ported to Windows.

=head2 How does libguestfs compare to other tools?

=over 4

=item I<vs. kpartx>

Libguestfs takes a different approach from kpartx.  kpartx needs root,
and mounts filesystems on the host kernel (which can be insecure - see
L<guestfs(3)/SECURITY>).  Libguestfs isolates your host kernel from
guests, is more flexible, scriptable, supports LVM, doesn't require
root, is isolated from other processes, and cleans up after itself.
Libguestfs is more than just file access because you can use it to
create images from scratch.

=item I<vs. vdfuse>

vdfuse is like kpartx but for VirtualBox images.  See the kpartx
comparison above.  You can use libguestfs on the partition files
exposed by vdfuse, although it's not necessary since libguestfs can
access VirtualBox images directly.

=item I<vs. qemu-nbd>

nbd is like kpartx but for qcow2 images.  See the kpartx comparison
above.  You can use libguestfs and qemu-nbd together for access to
block devices over the network.

=item I<vs. mounting filesystems in the host>

Mounting guest filesystems in the host is insecure and should be
avoided completely for untrusted guests.  Use libguestfs to provide a
layer of protection against filesystem exploits.  See also
L<guestmount(1)>.

=item I<vs. parted>

Libguestfs supports LVM.  Libguestfs uses parted and provides most
parted features through the libguestfs API.

=back

=head1 GETTING HELP AND REPORTING BUGS

=head2 How do I know what version I'm using?

The simplest method is:

 guestfish --version

Libguestfs development happens along an unstable branch and we
periodically create a stable branch which we backport stable patches
to.  To find out more, read L<guestfs(3)/LIBGUESTFS VERSION NUMBERS>.

=head2 How can I get help?
What mailing lists or chat rooms are available?

If you are a Red Hat customer using Red Hat Enterprise Linux, please
contact Red Hat Support: L<http://redhat.com/support>

There is a mailing list, mainly for development, but users are also
welcome to ask questions about libguestfs and the virt tools:
L<https://www.redhat.com/mailman/listinfo/libguestfs>

You can also talk to us on IRC channel C<#libguestfs> on FreeNode.
We're not always around, so please stay in the channel after asking
your question and someone will get back to you.

For other virt tools (not ones supplied with libguestfs) there is a
general virt tools mailing list:
L<https://www.redhat.com/mailman/listinfo/virt-tools-list>

=head2 How do I report bugs?

Please use the following link to enter a bug in Bugzilla:

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/enter_bug.cgi?component=libguestfs&product=Virtualization+Tools>

Include as much detail as you can and a way to reproduce the problem.

Include the full output of L<libguestfs-test-tool(1)>.

=head1 COMMON ERRORS

=head2 "child process died unexpectedly"

This error indicates that qemu failed or the host kernel could not boot.
To get further information about the failure, you have to run:

 libguestfs-test-tool

If, after using this, you still don't understand the failure, contact
us (see previous section).

=head1 COMMON PROBLEMS

See also L<guestfs(3)/LIBGUESTFS GOTCHAS> for some "gotchas" with
using the libguestfs API.

=head2 Non-ASCII characters don't appear on VFAT filesystems.

Typical symptoms of this problem:

=over 4

=item *

You get an error when you create a file where the filename contains
non-ASCII characters, particularly non 8-bit characters from Asian
languages (Chinese, Japanese, etc).  The filesystem is VFAT.

=item *

When you list a directory from a VFAT filesystem, filenames appear as
question marks.

=back

This is a design flaw of the GNU/Linux system.

VFAT stores long filenames as UTF-16 characters.  When opening or
returning filenames, the Linux kernel has to translate these to some
form of 8 bit string.  UTF-8 would be the obvious choice, except for
Linux users who persist in using non-UTF-8 locales (the user's locale
is not known to the kernel because it's a function of libc).

Therefore you have to tell the kernel what translation you want done
when you mount the filesystem.  The two methods are the C<iocharset>
parameter (which is not relevant to libguestfs) and the C<utf8> flag.

So to use a VFAT filesystem you must add the C<utf8> flag when
mounting.  From guestfish, use:

 ><fs> mount-options utf8 /dev/sda1 /

or on the guestfish command line:

 guestfish [...] -m /dev/sda1:/:utf8

or from the API:

 guestfs_mount_options (g, "utf8", "/dev/sda1", "/");

The kernel will then translate filenames to and from UTF-8 strings.

We considered adding this mount option transparently, but
unfortunately there are several problems with doing that:

=over 4

=item *

On some Linux systems, the C<utf8> mount option doesn't work.  We
don't precisely understand what systems or why, but this was reliably
reported by one user.

=item *

It would prevent you from using the C<iocharset> parameter because it
is incompatible with C<utf8>.  It is probably not a good idea to use
this parameter, but we don't want to prevent it.

=back

=head2 Non-ASCII characters appear as underscore (_) on ISO9660 filesystems.

The filesystem was not prepared correctly with mkisofs or genisoimage.
Make sure the filesystem was created using Joliet and/or Rock Ridge
extensions.  libguestfs does not require any special mount options to
handle the filesystem.

=head1 DOWNLOADING, INSTALLING, COMPILING LIBGUESTFS

=begin html

<!-- old anchor for the next section -->
<a name="binaries"/>

=end html

=head2 Where can I get the latest binaries for ...?

=over 4

=item Fedora E<ge> 11, RHEL E<ge> 5.3, EPEL 5

Use:

 yum install '*guestf*'

For the latest builds, see:
L<http://koji.fedoraproject.org/koji/packageinfo?packageID=8391>

=item Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6

It is part of the default install.  On RHEL 6 (only) you have to
install C<libguestfs-winsupport> to get Windows guest support.

=item RHEL 6.3

Preview packages are available here:
L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/libguestfs-RHEL-6.3-preview/>

=item Debian Squeeze (6)

Use Hilko Bengen's backport repository:
L<http://people.debian.org/~bengen/libguestfs/>

=item Debian Wheezy and later (7+)

Official Debian packages are available:
L<http://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=libguestfs>
(thanks Hilko Bengen).

=item Ubuntu

We don't have an Ubuntu maintainer, and the packages supplied by
Canonical (which are outside our control) are often broken.  Try
compiling from source (next section).

Canonical decided to change the permissions on the kernel so that it's
not readable except by root.  This is completely stupid, but they
won't change it
(L<https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/linux/+bug/759725>).
So every user should do this:

 sudo chmod 0644 /boot/vmlinuz*

=item Ubuntu 10.04

See:
L<http://libguestfs.org/download/binaries/ubuntu1004-packages/>

=item Ubuntu 12.04

libguestfs in this version of Ubuntu works, but you need to update
febootstrap and seabios to the latest versions.

You need febootstrap E<ge> 3.14-2 from:
L<http://packages.ubuntu.com/precise/febootstrap>

After installing or updating febootstrap, rebuild the appliance:

 sudo update-guestfs-appliance

You need seabios E<ge> 0.6.2-0ubuntu2.1 or E<ge> 0.6.2-0ubuntu3 from:
L<http://packages.ubuntu.com/precise-updates/seabios>
or
L<http://packages.ubuntu.com/quantal/seabios>

Also you need to do (see above):

 sudo chmod 0644 /boot/vmlinuz*

=item Gentoo

Libguestfs was added to Gentoo in 2012-07.  Do:

 emerge libguestfs

=item Other Linux distro

Compile from source (next section).

=item Other non-Linux distro

You'll have to compile from source, and port it.

=back

=head2 How can I compile and install libguestfs from source?

If your Linux distro has a working port of febootstrap (that is,
Fedora, Red Hat Enterprise Linux >= 6.3, Debian, Ubuntu and ArchLinux)
then you should just be able to compile from source in the usual way.
Download the latest tarball from L<http://libguestfs.org/download>,
unpack it, and start by reading the README file.

If you I<don't> have febootstrap, you will need to use the "fixed
appliance method".  See:
L<http://libguestfs.org/download/binaries/appliance/>

Patches to port febootstrap to more Linux distros are welcome.

=head2 Why do I get an error when I try to rebuild from the source
RPMs supplied by Red Hat / Fedora?

Because of the complexity of building the libguestfs appliance, the
source RPMs provided cannot be rebuilt directly using C<rpmbuild> or
C<mock>.

If you use Koji (which is open source software and may be installed
locally), then the SRPMs can be rebuilt in Koji.
L<https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Koji>

If you don't have or want to use Koji, then you have to give
libguestfs access to the network so it can download the RPMs for
building the appliance.  You also need to set an RPM macro to tell
libguestfs to use the network.  Put the following line into a file
called C<$HOME/.rpmmacros>:

 %libguestfs_buildnet   1

If you are using mock, do:

 mock -D '%libguestfs_buildnet 1' [etc]

=head2 Libguestfs has a really long list of dependencies!

That's because it does a lot of things.

=head2 How can I speed up libguestfs builds?

By far the most important thing you can do is to install and properly
configure Squid.  Note that the default configuration that ships with
Squid is rubbish, so configuring it is not optional.

A very good place to start with Squid configuration is here:
L<https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/Extras/MockTricks#Using_Squid_to_Speed_Up_Mock_package_downloads>

Make sure Squid is running, and that the environment variables
C<$http_proxy> and C<$ftp_proxy> are pointing to it.

With Squid running and correctly configured, appliance builds should
be reduced to a few minutes.

=head1 SPEED, DISK SPACE USED BY LIBGUESTFS

Note: Most of the information in this section has moved:
L<guestfs-performance(1)>.

=head2 Upload or write seem very slow.

In libguestfs E<lt> 1.13.16, the mount command
(L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_mount>) enabled option C<-o sync> implicitly.
This causes very poor write performance, and was one of the main
gotchas for new libguestfs users.

For libguestfs E<lt> 1.13.16, replace mount with C<mount-options>,
leaving the first parameter as an empty string.

You can also do this with more recent versions of libguestfs, but if
you know that you are using libguestfs ≥ 1.13.16 then it's safe to use
plain mount.

If the underlying disk is not fully allocated (eg. sparse raw or
qcow2) then writes can be slow because the host operating system has
to do costly disk allocations while you are writing. The solution is
to use a fully allocated format instead, ie. non-sparse raw, or qcow2
with the C<preallocation=metadata> option.

=head2 Libguestfs uses too much disk space!

libguestfs caches a large-ish appliance in:

 /var/tmp/.guestfs-<UID>

If the environment variable C<TMPDIR> is defined, then
C<$TMPDIR/.guestfs-E<lt>UIDE<gt>> is used instead.

It is safe to delete this directory when you are not using libguestfs.

=head1 USING LIBGUESTFS IN YOUR OWN PROGRAMS

=head2 The API has hundreds of methods, where do I start?

We recommend you start by reading the API overview:
L<guestfs(3)/API OVERVIEW>.

Although the API overview covers the C API, it is still worth reading
even if you are going to use another programming language, because the
API is the same, just with simple logical changes to the names of the
calls:

                  C  guestfs_ln_sf (g, target, linkname);
             Python  g.ln_sf (target, linkname);
              OCaml  g#ln_sf target linkname;
               Perl  $g->ln_sf (target, linkname);
  Shell (guestfish)  ln-sf target linkname
                PHP  guestfs_ln_sf ($g, $target, $linkname);

Once you're familiar with the API overview, you should look at this
list of starting points for other language bindings:
L<guestfs(3)/USING LIBGUESTFS WITH OTHER PROGRAMMING LANGUAGES>.

=begin html

<!-- old anchor for the next section -->
<a name="debug"/>

=end html

=head2 Can I use libguestfs in my proprietary / closed source / commercial program?

In general, yes.  However this is not legal advice.  You should read
the license that comes with libguestfs, and if you have specific
questions about your obligations when distributing libguestfs, contact
a lawyer.  In the source tree the license is in the file
C<COPYING.LIB> (LGPLv2+ for the library and bindings) and C<COPYING>
(GPLv2+ for the standalone programs).

=head1 DEBUGGING LIBGUESTFS

=head2 How do I debug when using any libguestfs program or tool
(eg. virt-v2v or virt-df)?

There are two C<LIBGUESTFS_*> environment variables you can set in
order to get more information from libguestfs.

=over 4

=item C<LIBGUESTFS_TRACE>

Set this to 1 and libguestfs will print out each command / API call in
a format which is similar to guestfish commands.

=item C<LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG>

Set this to 1 in order to enable massive amounts of debug messages.
If you think there is some problem inside the libguestfs appliance,
then you should use this option.

=back

To set these from the shell, do this before running the program:

 export LIBGUESTFS_TRACE=1
 export LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG=1

For csh/tcsh the equivalent commands would be:

 setenv LIBGUESTFS_TRACE 1
 setenv LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG 1

For further information, see: L<guestfs(3)/ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES>.

=head2 How do I debug when using guestfish?

You can use the same environment variables above.  Alternatively use
the guestfish options -x (to trace commands) or -v (to get the full
debug output), or both.

For further information, see: L<guestfish(1)>.

=head2 How do I debug when using the API?

Call L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_set_trace> to enable command traces, and/or
L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_set_verbose> to enable debug messages.

For best results, call these functions as early as possible, just
after creating the guestfs handle if you can, and definitely before
calling launch.

=head2 How do I capture debug output and put it into my logging system?

Use the event API.  For examples, see:
L<guestfs(3)/SETTING CALLBACKS TO HANDLE EVENTS>.

=head2 Digging deeper into the appliance boot process.

Enable debugging and then read this documentation on the appliance
boot process: L<guestfs(3)/INTERNALS>.

=head2 libguestfs hangs or fails during run/launch.

Enable debugging and look at the full output.  If you cannot work out
what is going on, file a bug report, including the I<complete> output
of L<libguestfs-test-tool(1)>.

=head1 DESIGN/INTERNALS OF LIBGUESTFS

=head2 Why don't you do everything through the FUSE / filesystem
interface?

We offer a command called L<guestmount(1)> which lets you mount guest
filesystems on the host.  This is implemented as a FUSE module.  Why
don't we just implement the whole of libguestfs using this mechanism,
instead of having the large and rather complicated API?

The reasons are twofold.  Firstly, libguestfs offers API calls for
doing things like creating and deleting partitions and logical
volumes, which don't fit into a filesystem model very easily.  Or
rather, you could fit them in: for example, creating a partition could
be mapped to C<mkdir /fs/hda1> but then you'd have to specify some
method to choose the size of the partition (maybe C<echo 100M E<gt>
/fs/hda1/.size>), and the partition type, start and end sectors etc.,
but once you've done that the filesystem-based API starts to look more
complicated than the call-based API we currently have.

The second reason is for efficiency.  FUSE itself is reasonably
efficient, but it does make lots of small, independent calls into the
FUSE module.  In guestmount these have to be translated into messages
to the libguestfs appliance which has a big overhead (in time and
round trips).  For example, reading a file in 64 KB chunks is
inefficient because each chunk would turn into a single round trip.
In the libguestfs API it is much more efficient to download an entire
file or directory through one of the streaming calls like
C<guestfs_download> or C<guestfs_tar_out>.

=head2 Why don't you do everything through GVFS?

The problems are similar to the problems with FUSE.

GVFS is a better abstraction than POSIX/FUSE.  There is an FTP backend
for GVFS, which is encouraging because FTP is conceptually similar to
the libguestfs API.  However the GVFS FTP backend makes multiple
simultaneous connections in order to keep interactivity, which we
can't easily do with libguestfs.

=head2 Can I use C<guestfish --ro> as a way to backup my virtual machines?

Usually this is not a good idea.  The question is answered in more
detail in this mailing list posting:
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2010-August/msg00024.html>

=head2 What's the difference between guestfish and virt-rescue?

A lot of people are confused by the two superficially similar tools we
provide:

 $ guestfish --ro -a guest.img
 ><fs> run
 ><fs> fsck /dev/sda1

 $ virt-rescue --ro guest.img
 ><rescue> /sbin/fsck /dev/sda1

And the related question which then arises is why you can't type in
full shell commands with all the --options in guestfish (but you can
in L<virt-rescue(1)>).

L<guestfish(1)> is a program providing structured access to the
L<guestfs(3)> API.  It happens to be a nice interactive shell too, but
its primary purpose is structured access from shell scripts.  Think of
it more like a language binding, like Python and other bindings, but
for shell.  The key differentiating factor of guestfish (and the
libguestfs API in general) is the ability to automate changes.

L<virt-rescue(1)> is a free-for-all freeform way to boot the
libguestfs appliance and make arbitrary changes to your VM. It's not
structured, you can't automate it, but for making quick ad-hoc fixes
to your guests, it can be quite useful.

But, libguestfs also has a "backdoor" into the appliance allowing you
to send arbitrary shell commands.  It's not as flexible as
virt-rescue, because you can't interact with the shell commands, but
here it is anyway:

 ><fs> debug sh "cmd arg1 arg2 ..."

Note that you should B<not> rely on this.  It could be removed or
changed in future. If your program needs some operation, please add it
to the libguestfs API instead.

=head2 What's the deal with C<guestfish -i>?
Why does virt-cat only work on a real VM image, but virt-df works on
any disk image?
What does "no root device found in this operating system image" mean?

These questions are all related at a fundamental level which may not
be immediately obvious.

At the L<guestfs(3)> API level, a "disk image" is just a pile of
partitions and filesystems.

In contrast, when the virtual machine boots, it mounts those
filesystems into a consistent hierarchy such as:

 /          (/dev/sda2)
 |
 +-- /boot  (/dev/sda1)
 |
 +-- /home  (/dev/vg_external/Homes)
 |
 +-- /usr   (/dev/vg_os/lv_usr)
 |
 +-- /var   (/dev/vg_os/lv_var)

(or drive letters on Windows).

The API first of all sees the disk image at the "pile of filesystems"
level.  But it also has a way to inspect the disk image to see if it
contains an operating system, and how the disks are mounted when the
operating system boots: L<guestfs(3)/INSPECTION>.

Users expect some tools (like L<virt-cat(1)>) to work with VM paths:

 virt-cat fedora.img /var/log/messages

How does virt-cat know that C</var> is a separate partition?  The
trick is that virt-cat performs inspection on the disk image, and uses
that to translate the path correctly.

Some tools (including L<virt-cat(1)>, L<virt-edit(1)>, L<virt-ls(1)>)
use inspection to map VM paths.  Other tools, such as L<virt-df(1)>
and L<virt-filesystems(1)> operate entirely at the raw "big pile of
filesystems" level of the libguestfs API, and don't use inspection.

L<guestfish(1)> is in an interesting middle ground.  If you use the
I<-a> and I<-m> command line options, then you have to tell guestfish
exactly how to add disk images and where to mount partitions. This is
the raw API level.

If you use the I<-i> option, libguestfs performs inspection and mounts
the filesystems for you.

The error C<no root device found in this operating system image> is
related to this.  It means inspection was unable to locate an
operating system within the disk image you gave it.  You might see
this from programs like virt-cat if you try to run them on something
which is just a disk image, not a virtual machine disk image.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfish(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2012 Red Hat Inc. L<http://libguestfs.org/>

This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public
License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
Lesser General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public
License along with this library; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
