=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

hivexml - Convert Windows Registry binary "hive" into XML

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 hivexml [-dk] hivefile > output.xml

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program converts a single Windows Registry binary "hive"
file into a self-describing XML format.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-d>

Enable lots of debug messages.  If you find a Registry file
that this program cannot parse, please enable this option and
post the complete output I<and> the Registry file in your
bug report.

=item B<-k>

Keep going even if we find errors in the Registry file.  This
skips over any parts of the Registry that we cannot read.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<hivex(3)>,
L<hivexget(1)>,
L<hivexsh(1)>,
L<virt-win-reg(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<virt-cat(1)>,
L<virt-edit(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009 Red Hat Inc.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
