=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

hivexget - Get subkey from a Windows Registry binary "hive" file

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 hivexget hivefile '\Path\To\SubKey'

 hivexget hivefile '\Path\To\SubKey' name

=head1 DESCRIPTION

I<Note:> This is a low-level tool.  For a more convenient way to
navigate the Windows Registry in Windows virtual machines, see
L<virt-win-reg(1)>.

This program navigates through a Windows Registry binary "hive"
file and extracts I<either> all the (key, value) data pairs
stored in that subkey I<or> just the single named data item.

In the first form:

 hivexget hivefile '\Path\To\SubKey'

C<hivefile> is some Windows Registry binary hive, and C<\Path\To\Subkey>
is a path within that hive.  I<NB> the path is relative to the top
of this hive, and is I<not> the full path as you would use in Windows
(eg. C<\HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE> is not a valid path).

If the subkey exists, then the output lists all data pairs under this
subkey, in a format compatible with C<regedit> in Windows.

In the second form:

 hivexget hivefile '\Path\To\SubKey' name

C<hivefile> and path are as above.  C<name> is the name of the value
of interest (use C<@> for the default value).

The corresponding data item is printed "raw" (ie. no processing or
escaping) except:

=over 4

=item 1

If it's a string we will convert it from Windows UTF-16 to UTF-8, if
this conversion is possible.  The string is printed with a single
trailing newline.

=item 2

If it's a multiple-string value, each string is printed on a separate
line.

=item 3

If it's a numeric value, it is printed as a decimal number.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<hivex(3)>,
L<hivexml(1)>,
L<hivexsh(1)>,
L<virt-win-reg(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<virt-cat(1)>,
L<virt-edit(1)>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009 Red Hat Inc.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
