=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.40

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.38.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New features in existing tools

Virt-inspector now displays the libosinfo short ID for guests
(Pino Toscano).

Guestfish I<-N> will now generate 1G disks instead of 100M disks by
default.

Virt-resize supports f2fs filesystems (Pino Toscano).

libguestfs-test-tool now supports bash tab completion
(Pino Toscano).

The I<--machine-readable> option now supports sending output to files
or stdout/stderr.  This works uniformly across most OCaml-based virt
tools, specifically: virt-builder, virt-builder-repository, virt-dib,
virt-get-kernel, virt-resize, virt-sparsify, and virt-v2v (Pino
Toscano).

Virt-builder I<--uninstall> option now works on SUSE
(Sebastian Meyer).

Virt-builder now supports Windows.  We are not able to ship Windows
templates in the public repository for obvious licensing reasons, but
if you are an MSDN subscriber you may build your own.  See
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2018/09/13/creating-windows-templates-for-virt-builder/>

Many tools now support a I<--key> option allowing you to pass in
decryption keys for filesystems stored in local files on the host
rather than having to feed them in over stdin (Pino Toscano).

=head3 virt-v2v and virt-p2v

New I<-o rhv-upload> mode for directly uploading images to RHV,
bypassing the Export Storage Domain (Tomáš Golembiovský, Nir Soffer,
Daniel Erez, Pino Toscano).

New I<-o openstack> mode for directly uploading images to OpenStack
and Cinder using OpenStack APIs.

Virt-v2v now has a general mechanism for input and output options:
I<-io> and I<-oo>.

Virt-v2v can now install the RHV tools or QEMU GA in guests
(Tomáš Golembiovský).

The huge manual has now been split into several smaller documents and
is more focused on helping users to accomplish specific v2v tasks.

Multiple improvements to the OVF metadata when converting to RHV
(Tomáš Golembiovský, Pino Toscano, Arik Hadas).

Virt-v2v can now convert Linux guests with split kernel packages,
especially Ubuntu 18.04 (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v old I<--password-file> option has been replaced by I<-ip>
(the old option remains for backwards compatibility).

Virt-v2v now preserves the VM Generation ID.

Virt-v2v has a new I<--mac> option allowing specific NICs to be mapped
precisely to networks or bridges on the target.

New virt-v2v I<--print-estimate> option to estimate the size of data
that virt-v2v will copy.

Virt-v2v is now usually able to remove open-vm-tools and VMware Tools
from the Linux guest during conversion (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v can now support UEFI conversions to RHV (Tomáš Golembiovský).

Virt-p2v now prefers you to shut down instead of rebooting the machine
after conversion has finished (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v now writes the libosinfo short ID to the libvirt metadata
when using I<-o local> and I<-o libvirt> output modes
(Martin Kletzander).

=head3 Language bindings

OpenJDK 10+ is supported (Pino Toscano).

Java bindings fixed for Gentoo host (Martin Kletzander).

=head3 Inspection

Support Kali Linux (Pino Toscano).

When inspecting mountpoints, look for F</etc/mdadm/mdadm.conf> as well
as F</etc/mdadm.conf> (Nikolay Ivanets).

Improved support for OpenSUSE Tumbleweed (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Miscellaneous macOS build fixes (Adam Robinson).

=head3 Other

Multiple documentation typos fixed (Yuri Chornoivan).

=head2 Security

See also L<guestfs-security(1)>.

=head3 CVE-2018-11806

Qemu's slirp (userspace networking) had several buffer overflows which
could be triggered from the guest or network side.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<f2fs_expand>

Expand an f2fs filesystem (Pino Toscano).

=item C<inspect_get_osinfo>

Get the libosinfo short ID for the inspected guest (Pino Toscano).

=item C<lvm_scan>

This rescans all PVs, VGs and LVs, optionally activating them.

=back

=head3 Other API changes

C<part_get_mbr_part_type> was reimplemented in OCaml
(Nikolay Ivanets).

C<list_filesystems> now filters out MBR extended partitions
(Nikolay Ivanets).

C<vgscan> has been deprecated.  Use the new C<lvm_scan> API in
preference.

=head2 Build changes

The JSON library switched from yajl to Jansson E<ge> 2.7 (Pino Toscano).

Support for The Sleuth Kit 4.5 (Pino Toscano).

Multiple improvements in the C<./configure> script (Lin Ma).

More out-of-tree build fixes (Hilko Bengen).

Some work on reproducible builds (Bernhard M. Wiedemann).

=head2 Internals

lvmetad is now used unconditionally, and is started much earlier in
the appliance boot process.  This fixes support for certain PV types.

On Debian, dash is installed inside the appliance and in virt-rescue
(Pino Toscano).

The amount of RAM assigned to the appliance has been increased from
500M to 768M (on x86_64, other architectures have different limits).
This enables use of up to 255 disks when using recent Linux kernels.

Virt-v2v now models the source machine type (eg. i440FX, Q35 or virt).

Virt-p2v now generates configuration code automatically, also code for
parsing the kernel command line.

Use C<LT_INIT> instead of C<AC_PROG_LIBTOOL>.

The OCaml C<JSON> code for parsing and serializing has been unified
into a single abstract data type.

Most OCaml tools are now built using the PIC runtime.  This has a
performance penalty on i686, but is relatively free on other
architectures and has security benefits.

The direct backend now queries the qemu binary for availability of
KVM, instead of using a heuristic based on F</dev/kvm> (Andrea
Bolognani).

Our "clever" libxml2 writer macros are now used consistently across
all parts of the code base.

Qemu dropped I<-nodefconfig> without telling us.  The equivalent
I<-no-user-config> option is now used instead.  Qemu also moved the
C<serial> option from I<-drive> to I<-device>, again without any
notice, and this is also fixed.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.38.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1664310>

[RHEL 7.6 LP] openstack output leaks passwords

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1661038>

virt-inspector fails with "error: int_of_string" on a Linux image when /etc/fstab contains a partionless device

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1651432>

v2v - support for -insecure option to support OSP SSL connection for VM migrations

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1642044>

[RFE] virt-p2v UI should give the option to shutdown after conversion is finished

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1634248>

virt-v2v cannot convert opensuse15 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1624902>

Fix rhev-apt command that virt-v2v runs in Windows guests on first boot

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1624878>

Update v2v docs to describe support for SHA 2 certs required for converting Windows 7 and 2008 R2 guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1615885>

Minor log issue of virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1614276>

VixDiskLib: VixDiskLib_Read: Read 4096 sectors at 57516160 failed. Error 2 (Memory allocation failed. Out of memory.) (DiskLib error 802: NBD_ERR_INSUFFICIENT_RESOURCES) at 5240.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1612785>

"warning: <target dev='sr0'> was ignored because the device name could not be recognized" should be hidden since convert cdrom is supported by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1611690>

part_to_dev "/dev/sdp1" returns "/dev/sd" instead of "/dev/sdp"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1608131>

inspection fails when swap partition in /etc/fstab has incorrect UUID compared to actual swap partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1605071>

On machines where /dev/kvm exists but KVM doesn't work, libguestfs will not fall back to TCG

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1602353>

virt-inspector can't inspect LUKS-encrypted RHEL7 guest image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1601943>

Improve error "No module named ovirtsdk4" in v2v rhv-upload conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1598715>

Adding QXL device in OVF causes Cirrus Logic device to be added to guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1598350>

RFE: virt-v2v should preserve <genid>

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1596851>

Transfer fails if local host is in maintenance mode

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1596810>

Transfer fails if local host belongs to another DC

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1592468>

v2v to RHV transfer fails with: error: [empty name]: cannot read '//*/disksection' with value: null

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1592061>

virt-v2v convert rhel5.3 failure when executing rpm -ql kernel-2.6.18-128.el5 command

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1591789>

p2v: error: XML error: CPU vendor specified without CPU model

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1590220>

Hide rhv-upload option in virt-p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1588451>

Don't use relative socket paths for NBD

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1588088>

RFE: Support for -o rhv-upload via Unix domain socket

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1586198>

ovirt-imageio-daemon times out during migration

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1580309>

virt-v2v rhel7.6 build can't convert guest to null with qemu-kvm rhel7.5.z build

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1580292>

Virt-v2v rhel7.6 build can't convert guest with qemu-kvm rhel7.5.z build

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1579047>

virt-builder: ubuntu-18.04 template has stray HTTP proxy configured for apt

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1575640>

virt-builder: error: host cpu (x86_64) and guest arch (unknown) are not compatible

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1570407>

virt-v2v -i ova gives checksum error when missing files are mentioned in .mf

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1567763>

guestfsd: error: /Windows/Drivers/VirtIO: Read-only file system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1564983>

The mount-vfs failed to mount the logical volume

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1561828>

RHV tools not properly installed in migrated Windows VM's causing boot failure

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1559027>

virt-v2v does not honor --network with -o rhv-upload

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1557273>

[RFE] Upload images directly to oVirt (virt-v2v -o rhv-upload)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544842>

[RFE] Add libosinfo short-id to virt-inspector output

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544674>

virt-inspector --help differs from manpage

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544227>

RFE: recognize the Kali Linux distribution

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1532224>

Resume=/dev/sdaX can't be updated to resume=/dev/vdaX in rhel7 guest's grub file after v2v conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1530967>

Change categories of "Guest Operating system management by VIX API" in v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1527334>

Various -it vddk -io vddk* options should be documented, removed or fixed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1148012>

B<Reverted:>
RFE: Allow qemu-bridge-helper to be used to implement guestfs_set_network

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
