=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.56

These are the release notes for libguestfs stable release 1.56.
This describes the major changes since 1.54.

Libguestfs 1.56.0 was released on B<XXX XXX 2025>.

=head2 Inspection

Add support for Windows 2025 (thanks Ming Xie).

Add support for TencentOS (Denise Cheng).

Inspection of Ubuntu 22+ guests that use a split F</usr> configuration
now works properly (thanks Jaroslav Spanko, Daniel Berrange).

Inspecting guests that have duplicated root mountpoints now works.

=head2 API

New C<command_out> and C<sh_out> APIs which allow you to capture
output from guest commands that generate more output than the protocol
limit allows.

New C<btrfs_scrub_full> API which runs a full Btrfs scrub,
synchronously.  It works more like fsck for other filesystems.

The C<fstrim> API has been modified to work around several issues in
upstream and RHEL 9 kernels related to XFS support (Eric Sandeen, Dave
Chinner).

The existing C<e2fsck> API has a new C<FORCENO> option enabling use of
the command line I<-n> flag.

=begin comment

=head2 Tools

=end comment

=head2 Language bindings

Previously C<-L../lib/.libs> got embedded in the distributed OCaml
bindings.  This has been fixed.

=head2 Build changes

json-c is now required.  This replaces Jansson which was previously
used for parsing JSON input files.

OCaml E<ge> 4.08 is now required.

OCaml oUnit is no longer used.

We now assume that C<__attribute__((cleanup))> always works.  This
requires gcc or Clang.

Fix compatibility with L<file(1)> E<ge> 5.46.

Fix compatibility with Fedora E<ge> 42 which merges F</usr/sbin> into
F</usr/bin>.

Fix compatibility with latest Rust compiler (Jacob Reger).

L<lex(1)>, L<yacc(1)> and libmagic (part of L<file(1)>) have not been
required by libguestfs for a long time, but were still checked by the
F<./configure> script.  This has been fixed, they are no longer build
dependencies (thanks Mohamed Akram).

When using C<./configure --disable-daemon> we no longer require augeas
and hivex (thanks Mohamed Akram).

C<zfs-fuse> support has been dropped.  The project is unmaintained
upstream.

=head2 Internals

The tests were modified to use a set of common functions and remove
use of the weird C<$TEST_FUNCTIONS> macro, similar to how we do it in
nbdkit.

Fix dhcpcd failing on systemd-resolved stub (Thomas Wouters).

Add support for dhcpcd and sfdisk on Debian (Daniel Gomez).

Print the kernel utsname in debug output.

The legacy C<pvs_full>, C<vgs_full> and C<lvs_full> APIs were
completely rewritten in OCaml.

Some deprecated autoconf macros are no longer used.

We no longer emit a false warning about C<BLKDISCARD> when creating a
block device.

Some internal OCaml List and String functions that we used have been
replaced by ones from the OCaml stdlib, reducing code maintenance.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.54.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-62935>

[rhel 9.6] windows version of win2025 guest shows incorrect during v2v conversion

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-80159>

Add new APIs to allow command output E<gt> 4MB

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-87493>

The Ubuntu 22.04 VM from VMware fails with Inspection field ‘i_arch’ was ‘unknown’ [rhel-9.7]

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-88450>

fstrim on a RHEL 7.2-created XFS filesystem does not trim as much as expected

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-88508>

Run fstrim twice to work around incorrect fstrim behaviour in RHEL 9 kernel

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-90168>

virt-v2v fails with mount exited with status 32: mount: /sysroot:
/dev/sda2 already mounted on /sysroot. [rhel-9.7]

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/155>

1.54.0: gdisk/test-expand-gpt.pl fails

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/162>

New test suite failure in c-api with file-5.46

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/167>

Weblate | erroneous source strings

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/182>

sed: RE error: illegal byte sequence in build

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/183>

bash-completion fails to install on macOS

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/184>

augeas, hivex and libmagic required even when daemon is disabled

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/191>

Failing to build ocaml/examples

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.54.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Cole Robinson

=item Daniel Gomez

=item Denise Cheng

=item Ettore Atalan

=item Jacob Reger

=item Krascovict Petrov

=item Léane GRASSER

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Ricky Tigg

=item Thomas Wouters

=item Yuri Chornoivan

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2025 Red Hat Inc.
