=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=begin comment

UPDATED TO <commit id>

=end comment

=begin comment

<script>
document.body.style.backgroundImage = "url('draft.png')";
document.body.style.backgroundRepeat = "no-repeat";
</script>

=end comment

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.40

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.38.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New features in existing tools

Virt-inspector now displays the libosinfo short ID for guests
(Pino Toscano).

Guestfish I<-N> will now generate 1G disks instead of 100M disks by
default.

Virt-resize supports f2fs filesystems (Pino Toscano).

libguestfs-test-tool now supports bash tab completion
(Pino Toscano).

The I<--machine-readable> option now supports sending output to files
or stdout/stderr.  This works uniformly across most OCaml-based virt
tools, specifically: virt-builder, virt-builder-repository, virt-dib,
virt-get-kernel, virt-resize, virt-sparsify, and virt-v2v (Pino
Toscano).

Virt-builder I<--uninstall> option now works on SUSE
(Sebastian Meyer).

Virt-builder now supports Windows.  We are not able to ship Windows
templates in the public respository for obvious licensing reasons, but
if you are an MSDN subscriber you may build your own.  See
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2018/09/13/creating-windows-templates-for-virt-builder/>

Many tools now support a I<--key> option allowing you to pass in
decryption keys for filesystems stored in local files on the host
rather than having to feed them in over stdin (Pino Toscano).

=head3 virt-v2v and virt-p2v

New I<-o rhv-upload> mode for directly uploading images to RHV,
bypassing the Export Storage Domain (Tomáš Golembiovský, Nir Soffer,
Daniel Erez, Pino Toscano).

New I<-o openstack> mode for directly uploading images to OpenStack
and Cinder using OpenStack APIs.

Virt-v2v now has a general mechanism for input and output options:
I<-io> and I<-oo>.

Virt-v2v can now install the RHV tools or QEMU GA in guests
(Tomáš Golembiovský).

The huge manual has now been split into several smaller documents and
is more focused on helping users to accomplish specific v2v tasks.

Multiple improvements to the OVF metadata when converting to RHV
(Tomáš Golembiovský, Pino Toscano, Arik Hadas).

Virt-v2v can now convert Linux guests with split kernel packages,
especially Ubuntu 18.04 (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v old I<--password-file> option has been replaced by I<-ip>
(the old option remains for backwards compatibility).

Virt-v2v now preserves the VM Generation ID.

Virt-v2v has a new I<--mac> option allowing specific NICs to be mapped
precisely to networks or bridges on the target.

New virt-v2v I<--print-estimate> option to estimate the size of data
that virt-v2v will copy.

Virt-v2v is now usually able to remove open-vm-tools and VMware Tools
from the Linux guest during conversion (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v can now support UEFI conversions to RHV (Tomáš Golembiovský).

Virt-p2v now prefers you to shut down instead of rebooting the machine
after conversion has finished (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v now writes the libosinfo short ID to the libvirt metadata
when using I<-o local> and I<-o libvirt> output modes
(Martin Kletzander).

=head3 Language bindings

OpenJDK 10+ is supported (Pino Toscano).

Java bindings fixed for Gentoo host (Martin Kletzander).

=head3 Inspection

Support Kali Linux (Pino Toscano).

When inspecting mountpoints, look for F</etc/mdadm/mdadm.conf> as well
as F</etc/mdadm.conf> (Nikolay Ivanets).

Improved support for OpenSUSE Tumbleweed (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Miscellaneous macOS build fixes (Adam Robinson).

=head3 Other

Multiple documentation typos fixed (Yuri Chornoivan).

=head2 Security

See also L<guestfs-security(1)>.

=head3 CVE-2018-11806

Qemu's slirp (userspace networking) had several buffer overflows which
could be triggered from the guest or network side.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<f2fs_expand>

Expand an f2fs filesystem (Pino Toscano).

=item C<inspect_get_osinfo>

Get the libosinfo short ID for the inspected guest (Pino Toscano).

=item C<lvm_scan>

This rescans all PVs, VGs and LVs, optionally activating them.

=back

=head3 Other API changes

C<part_get_mbr_part_type> was reimplemented in OCaml
(Nikolay Ivanets).

C<list_filesystems> now filters out MBR extended partitions
(Nikolay Ivanets).

C<vgscan> has been deprecated.  Use the new C<lvm_scan> API in
preference.

=head2 Build changes

The JSON library switched from yajl to Jansson E<ge> 2.7 (Pino Toscano).

Support for The Sleuth Kit 4.5 (Pino Toscano).

Multiple improvements in the C<./configure> script (Lin Ma).

More out-of-tree build fixes (Hilko Bengen).

Some work on reproducible builds (Bernhard M. Wiedemann).

=head2 Internals

lvmetad is now used unconditionally, and is started much earlier in
the appliance boot process.  This fixes support for certain PV types.

On Debian, dash is installed inside the appliance and in virt-rescue
(Pino Toscano).

The amount of RAM assigned to the appliance has been increased from
500M to 768M (on x86_64, other architectures have different limits).
This enables use of up to 255 disks when using recent Linux kernels.

Virt-v2v now models the source machine type (eg. i440FX, Q35 or virt).

Virt-p2v now generates configuration code automatically, also code for
parsing the kernel command line.

Use C<LT_INIT> instead of C<AC_PROG_LIBTOOL>.

The OCaml C<JSON> code for parsing and serializing has been unified
into a single abstract data type.

Most OCaml tools are now built using the PIC runtime.  This has a
performance penalty on i686, but is relatively free on other
architectures and has security benefits.

The direct backend now queries the qemu binary for availability of
KVM, instead of using a heuristic based on F</dev/kvm> (Andrea
Bolognani).

Our "clever" libxml2 writer macros are now used consistently across
all parts of the code base.

Qemu dropped I<-nodefconfig> without telling us.  The equivalent
I<-no-user-config> option is now used instead.  Qemu also moved the
C<serial> option from I<-drive> to I<-device>, again without any
notice, and this is also fixed.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.38.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1651432>

v2v - support for -insecure option to support OSP SSL connection for VM migrations

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1642044>

[RFE] virt-p2v UI should give the option to shutdown after conversion is finished

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1634248>

virt-v2v cannot convert opensuse15 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1624902>

Fix rhev-apt command that virt-v2v runs in Windows guests on first boot

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1624878>

Update v2v docs to describe support for SHA 2 certs required for converting Windows 7 and 2008 R2 guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1615885>

Minor log issue of virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1614276>

VixDiskLib: VixDiskLib_Read: Read 4096 sectors at 57516160 failed. Error 2 (Memory allocation failed. Out of memory.) (DiskLib error 802: NBD_ERR_INSUFFICIENT_RESOURCES) at 5240.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1612785>

"warning: <target dev='sr0'> was ignored because the device name could not be recognized" should be hidden since convert cdrom is supported by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1611690>

part_to_dev "/dev/sdp1" returns "/dev/sd" instead of "/dev/sdp"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1608131>

inspection fails when swap partition in /etc/fstab has incorrect UUID compared to actual swap partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1605071>

On machines where /dev/kvm exists but KVM doesn't work, libguestfs will not fall back to TCG

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1602353>

virt-inspector can't inspect LUKS-encrypted RHEL7 guest image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1601943>

Improve error "No module named ovirtsdk4" in v2v rhv-upload conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1598715>

Adding QXL device in OVF causes Cirrus Logic device to be added to guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1598350>

RFE: virt-v2v should preserve <genid>

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1596851>

Transfer fails if local host is in maintenance mode

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1596810>

Transfer fails if local host belongs to another DC

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1592468>

v2v to RHV transfer fails with: error: [empty name]: cannot read '//*/disksection' with value: null

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1592061>

virt-v2v convert rhel5.3 failure when executing rpm -ql kernel-2.6.18-128.el5 command

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1591789>

p2v: error: XML error: CPU vendor specified without CPU model

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1590220>

Hide rhv-upload option in virt-p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1588451>

Don't use relative socket paths for NBD

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1588088>

RFE: Support for -o rhv-upload via Unix domain socket

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1586198>

ovirt-imageio-daemon times out during migration

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1580309>

virt-v2v rhel7.6 build can't convert guest to null with qemu-kvm rhel7.5.z build

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1580292>

Virt-v2v rhel7.6 build can't convert guest with qemu-kvm rhel7.5.z build

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1579047>

virt-builder: ubuntu-18.04 template has stray HTTP proxy configured for apt

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1575640>

virt-builder: error: host cpu (x86_64) and guest arch (unknown) are not compatible

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1570407>

virt-v2v -i ova gives checksum error when missing files are mentioned in .mf

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1567763>

guestfsd: error: /Windows/Drivers/VirtIO: Read-only file system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1564983>

The mount-vfs failed to mount the logical volume

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1561828>

RHV tools not properly installed in migrated Windows VM's causing boot failure

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1559027>

virt-v2v does not honor --network with -o rhv-upload

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1557273>

[RFE] Upload images directly to oVirt (virt-v2v -o rhv-upload)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544842>

[RFE] Add libosinfo short-id to virt-inspector output

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544674>

virt-inspector --help differs from manpage

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1544227>

RFE: recognize the Kali Linux distribution

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1532224>

Resume=/dev/sdaX can't be updated to resume=/dev/vdaX in rhel7 guest's grub file after v2v conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1530967>

Change categories of "Guest Operating system management by VIX API" in v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1527334>

Various -it vddk -io vddk* options should be documented, removed or fixed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1148012>

B<Reverted:>
RFE: Allow qemu-bridge-helper to be used to implement guestfs_set_network

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.38

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.36.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New tools

Virt-builder-repository is a new tool allowing end users to create and
update virt-builder repositories (Cédric Bosdonnat).

Virt-rescue (while not a new tool) has been substantially rewritten,
implementing job control, I<-m> and I<-i> options, escape keys, etc.

=head3 New features in existing tools

Virt-builder planner has been improved so that faster and more
efficient build plans are chosen for complex cases, especially when
either the tmpdir or output is on networked storage.

New virt-builder Fedora templates (starting with Fedora 26) will have
plain partition layout and use GPT for partitions.

Virt-customize "firstboot" scripts in guests using systemd are now
installed under the C<multi-user.target> instead of C<default.target>
so they will only run when the system is booted normally.

Virt-customize now sets a random F</etc/machine-id> for Linux guests,
if one is not already set.

Virt-df now works correctly on filesystems with block sizes smaller
than 1K (Nikolay Ivanets).

Virt-dib has further compatibility enhancements with diskimage-builder
(Pino Toscano).

Virt-sysprep removes C<DHCP_HOSTNAME> from F<ifcfg-*> files.

Virt-sysprep now works on Oracle Linux (Jamie Iles).

Virt-resize now correctly copies GPT partition attributes from the
source to the destination (Cédric Bosdonnat).

Bash tab completion implemented or enhanced for: virt-win-reg,
virt-v2v-copy-to-local.

=head3 virt-v2v and virt-p2v

Virt-v2v can now read VMware VMX files directly, either from local
disk, NFS storage, or over SSH from an ESXi hypervisor.

Virt-v2v can now use VDDK as an input source.

Both virt-v2v and virt-p2v are now able to pass through the source CPU
vendor, model and topology.  However unfortunately not all source and
target hypervisors are able to provide or consume this data at
present (Tomáš Golembiovský).

Virt-v2v now supports encrypted guests (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v can now handle VMware snapshots.  Note that the snapshots are
collapsed — it I<does not> convert the chain of snapshots into a chain
of snapshots.

Virt-v2v now installs Windows 10 / Windows Server 2016 virtio block
drivers correctly (Pavel Butsykin, Kun Wei).

Virt-v2v now installs virtio-rng, balloon and pvpanic drivers, and
correctly sets this in the target hypervisor metadata for hypervisors
which support that (Tomáš Golembiovský).

Virt-v2v now installs both legacy and modern virtio keys in the
Windows registry (Ladi Prosek).

Virt-p2v can now preserve (in some cases) the offset of the Real Time
Clock from UTC.

Virt-p2v now combines several scp commands to the conversion server
into a single command, improving conversion times.

Virt-v2v now detects the special Linux Xen PV-only kernels correctly
(Laszlo Ersek).

Virt-v2v I<-o glance> now generates the right properties for UEFI
guests (Pino Toscano).

Virt-v2v I<-o null> now avoids spooling the guest to a temporary file,
instead it writes to the qemu "null block device".  This makes it
faster and use almost no disk space.

Virt-v2v I<-o rhv> now supports Windows 2016 Server guest type.

Virt-v2v I<-i libvirtxml> can now open network disks over http or
https.

Virt-v2v will now give a warning about host passthrough devices (Pino
Toscano).

The virt-v2v I<--machine-readable> output has been enhanced so it
includes C<vcenter-https>, C<xen-ssh> and C<in-place> facts (Pino
Toscano).

=head3 Language bindings

Fix multiple memory leaks and other data corruption problems in the
Java bindings (Pino Toscano).

Perl C<%guestfs_introspection> has been dropped.

=head3 Inspection

Inspection support was rewritten in OCaml and included inside the
daemon.  This makes inspection considerably faster, more robust and
more easily extensible in future.

Better icon support for ALT Linux guests (Pino Toscano).

Better support for NeoKylin (Qingzheng Zhang).

Can handle OSes like Void Linux which do not include C<VERSION_ID>
in F</etc/os-release> (Pino Toscano).

Add support for Microsoft MS-DOS (Daniel Berrangé).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Multiple fixes for S/390 architecture.  Libguestfs and all the tools
should now compile and run on this architecture.

=head3 Other

The libguestfs API is now thread-safe (although not parallel).  You
can call APIs on the same handle from multiple threads without needing
to take a lock.

=head2 Security

There were multiple vulnerabilities in the icoutils C<wrestool>
program which is run by libguestfs to create icons for Windows guests.
Using the latest C<wrestool> is recommended.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<hivex_value_string>

This replaces the deprecated C<hivex_value_utf8> API, but does the
same thing.

=item C<part_get_gpt_attributes>

=item C<part_set_gpt_attributes>

Read and write GPT partition attribute flags (Cédric Bosdonnat).

=item C<part_resize>

Enlarge or shrink an existing partition (Nikos Skalkotos).

=item C<yara_destroy>

=item C<yara_load>

=item C<yara_scan>

Support for the Yara malware scanning engine (Matteo Cafasso).

=back

=head3 Other API changes

APIs implemented in the daemon can now be written in either C or
OCaml.  Several APIs were rewritten in OCaml, although we are not
planning to rewrite all of them.

You will now get a clear error message if you try to add too many
disks to the appliance, instead of getting a peculiar failure from
qemu.

Certain APIs accidentally allowed you to use C</dev/urandom> as an
input "device", eg. C<g.copy_device_to_device("/dev/urandom",
"/dev/sda")>.  The code has been modified to I<forbid> this usage.

All APIs for inspecting installer CDs have been deprecated.  Use
libosinfo for this task.

=head2 Build changes

A working OCaml compiler E<ge> 4.01 is now required for building
libguestfs.  The C<./configure --disable-ocaml> option remains but is
only used to disable the OCaml language bindings.

Add C<RELEASES> file which lists release dates for each version of
libguestfs.  You must update this file when making a new release.

Documentation generated by C<gtk-doc> has been removed.  C<./configure
--enable-gtk-doc> now does nothing.

Libtirpc is now used for XDR functions and rpcgen.  Note that glibc
has deprecated and in most Linux distros dropped these, so for most
people this will be an extra dependency (Martin Kletzander).

Libxcrypt is now used for L<crypt(3)>.  This is required if using
glibc E<ge> 2.27.

C<ocaml-hivex> is now required.

Libvirt E<ge> 1.2.20 is now required.

There is now a C<make check-root> target for tests which need to be
run as root (analogous to C<make check-slow>).

C<./configure>-time check for C<__attribute__((cleanup))> now works in
the cross-compilation case (Yann E. Morin).

The C<AUTHORS> and C<p2v/about-authors.c> files are now generated from
a single place.

Either GnuPG v1 or v2 can be used.

C<./configure --with-guestfs-path> may be used to set the default
C<LIBGUESTFS_PATH>.  In addition the way that the path is searched has
changed slightly so that all types of appliances are searched in each
path element separately (Pavel Butsykin).

C<GUESTFSD_EXT_CMD> which was used to mark external commands in the
daemon has been removed.  It was originally used by SUSE builds, but
they have not been using it for a while.

The output from C<./configure> is now visually grouped under headings
related to what it is doing, making it much easier to scan (Pino
Toscano).

OCaml dependencies are now generated from a single script instead of
multiple not-quite-the-same Makefile fragments.

C<./configure --with-distro=ID> can be used to override automatic
Linux distro detection at build time (Pino Toscano).

qemu E<ge> 2.10 is supported (but not required).  This adds mandatory
locking to disks and libguestfs turns this off in certain
circumstances when it is known to be safe (Lars Seipel, Peter Krempa,
Daniel Berrangé, Pino Toscano, Fam Zheng, Yongkui Guo, Václav
Kadlčík).

=head2 Internals

Most common code has been moved to the F<common/> subdirectory, with
OCaml common code being in F<common/ml*> directories (eg.
F<common/visit> and F<common/mlvisit> contain the visitor library in C
and OCaml respectively).  The F<mllib> directory has been deleted and
replaced by F<common/mltools>.

There is now a lightweight OCaml binding for PCRE, see
F<common/mlpcre>.  Use of OCaml C<Str> library has been mostly
replaced with PCRE.

Add more calls to C<udev_settle> to improve stability of partition
code (Dawid Zamirski).

Run C<udev_settle> with I<--exit-if-exists> option, which improves the
speed of this command (Pavel Butsykin).

Detect new locations of L<major(3)>, L<minor(3)>, L<makedev(3)>.

Actions can now be deprecated with no suggested replacement, for APIs
such as C<guestfs_wait_ready> that should simply be removed from
client code.

Use gnulib C<set_nonblocking_flag> wrapper instead of calling
L<fcntl(2)> with C<O_NONBLOCK> (Eric Blake).  Similarly
C<set_cloexec_flag>.

Fix memory leak in XFS version of C<guestfs_vfs_minimum_size> (Pino
Toscano).

Valgrind checks now run on the virt-p2v binary.

Unicode single quotes (C<‘’>) and now used in place of C<''> or C<`'>
throughout the code and documentation.  Similarly for C<’s> instead of
C<'s>.

The C<is_zero> function has been reimplemented for greater speed (Eric
Blake).

In the direct backend, virtio-blk support has been removed.
Virtio-scsi is now the only supported way to add disks.

Generator string parameter and return types have been rationalised so
there are only two types (C<String>, C<StringList>) with many subtypes
eg. C<FileIn> becomes C<String (FileIn, ...)>.

The appliance disk image can now be in formats other than raw
(Pavel Butsykin).

Multiple improvements to how we automatically build Debian templates
for virt-builder (Pino Toscano).  Enable serial console for these
templates (Florian Klink).

In the daemon, instead of making a private copy of lvm.conf and
modifying it (eg for filters), start with an empty file since LVM
understands that to mean "all defaults" (Alasdair Kergon, Zdenek
Kabelac).

The C<direct> backend can now run QMP queries against the QEMU binary,
enhancing the kinds of information we can detect.  In addition the
code to query QEMU has been made more robust for handling multiple
parallel queries of different versions of QEMU.

OCaml Augeas bindings are bundled under F<common/mlaugeas>.  The long
term plan is to remove this and use system ocaml-augeas when it is
more widely available in distros (Pino Toscano).

All OCaml modules (C<*.ml> files) are now required to have an
interface file (C<*.mli>).  If they don't export anything then the
interface will be empty except for comments.

Certain OCaml features in OCaml E<ge> 4.01 are used throughout the
code, including replacing ‘{ field = field }’ with ‘{ field }’.

Virt-builder C<make-template> utility now uses the C<virt-install
--transient> option so that we should never need to clean up left over
domains after a crash.  It also saves kickstarts and virt-install
commands, which are committed to git for future reference.

F</dev/shm> is now created in the appliance (Nicolas Hicher).

In verbose mode on Fedora guests, virt-customize will now use C<dnf
--verbose> enabling better debugging output.

Virt-v2v input and output classes now contain a C<#precheck> method
which is used to perform environmental checks before conversion
starts.

Virt-p2v enables miniexpect debugging.  It is written to stderr (of
virt-p2v).

Virt-v2v free space checks are more liberal especially for smaller
guests (Pino Toscano).

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.36.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1540535>

Example URI of "Convert from ESXi hypervisor over SSH to local libvirt" is incorrect in v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1539395>

virt-customize segfaults after upgrading to 1.37.35-3

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1536765>

Libguestfs Perl bindings can leak a small amount of memory on error

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1536763>

libguestfs Lua bindings use strerror(), which isn’t thread safe

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1536603>

man page makes no mention of using '--' when trying to change exit on error behavior

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1525241>

virt-df displays zeros for filesystems with block size =512

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1519204>

v2v should improve the result when convert a rhel7.4 guest with no available kernels found in the bootloader

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1518517>

virt-v2v fails with "unsupported configuration: shared access for  disk 'sdb' requires use of supported storage format"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1516094>

Mere presence of QEMU file locking options breaks NBD (Block protocol 'nbd' doesn't support the option 'locking')

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1514756>

./configure --disable-ocaml breaks building common/mlpcre which breaks building daemon

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1513884>

[RFE]Should update some vddk info in v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1508874>

virt-v2v: warning: ova disk has an unknown VMware controller type (20)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1506572>

virt-v2v '-i ova' is not parsing the MAC address from the source OVF

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1506511>

virt-builder fails to parse repo file if it has blank space after the repository identifier

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1503958>

Failed to convert the rhel5 guest with kmod-xenpv installed from xen server by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1503497>

qemu-kvm fails to open qcow2 files in read-only mode with qemu-kvm 1.5.3

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1500673>

Error info shows wrong sometimes when ssh to conversion server using non-root user with sudo on p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1500537>

/dev/shm does not exist in the appliance environment

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1497475>

guestfish cannot list commands from interactive mode

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1493048>

Unbound constructor Hivex.OPEN_UNSAFE

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1484957>

bump debian images to use single-partition layout

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1482737>

virt-resize failed to expand swap partition for RHEL5.11 guest image with "parsing UUID failed"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1477623>

Running file API on a special chardev may hang forever

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1476081>

inspect-os  report error: could not parse integer in version number: V7Update2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1472719>

[RFE]Add warning in process of v2v converting guest which has pci passthrough device

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1472208>

virt-v2v fails on opensuse 13.2 guest with error: statns: statns_stub: path must start with a / character

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1469655>

firstboot scripts are not correctly installed in Fedora 26

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1466563>

Libguestfs should pass copyonread flag through to the libvirt XML

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1465665>

1.36.x build failure: gtkdocize fails using newer autotools due to missing GTK_DOC_CHECK in configure.ac

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1460338>

guestfs_shutdown hangs if main process sets signal handlers

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1459979>

guestfs_add_domain_argv fails with readonly option when vdi/vhd disk is attached to libvirt domain

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1451665>

RFE: Virt-v2v can't convert the guest which has encrypted partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1450325>

document URI format for -a parameters of tools

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1448739>

RFE: Support multicore decompression for OVA files using pigz and pxz

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1447202>

Win 2016 guest is described as Win 10 after imported to RHEVM

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1441197>

RFE: ability to convert VMware virtual machines via vmx

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1438939>

Please drop or update GnuPG (1.4.x) dependency

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1438794>

[RFE] Install Windows virtio-rng drivers on VMs imported

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1433937>

virt-inspector can't get icon info from altlinux-centaurus

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1433577>

policycoreutils setfiles >= 2.6 does .. nothing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1431579>

Windows 8 UEFI from VMware to KVM fails to boot after conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1430680>

There is error info about "No such file or directory" when convert a guest from ova file by v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1430184>

virt-dib should generate sha256 checksum instead of sha512

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1429506>

RFE: OVMF should be detected on conversion server to prevent failed conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1429491>

Should rename network name of rhv in virt-v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1427529>

virt-sysprep should remove DHCP_HOSTNAME

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1417306>

QEMU image file locking (libguestfs)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1409024>

[Debian] Missing db_dump abort inspection

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1406906>

Segmentation fault when reading corrupted path with Python 3 bindings

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1379289>

RFE: virt-p2v should support mnemonic operations

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1378022>

There is virt-v2v warning about <listen type='none'> during converting a guest which has listen type='none' in XML

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1376547>

qemu-system-s390x: -device isa-serial,chardev=charserial0,id=serial0: 'isa-serial' is not a valid device model name

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1374232>

selinux relabel fails on RHEL 6.2 guests with "libguestfs error: selinux_relabel: : Success"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1367738>

Missing bash completion scripts for: virt-diff guestunmount virt-copy-in virt-copy-out virt-customize virt-get-kernel virt-p2v-make-disk virt-p2v-make-kickstart virt-tar-in virt-tar-out virt-v2v-copy-to-local virt-win-reg

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1362649>

RFE: virt-sysprep does not utilize libguestfs encryption support

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1172425>

[RFE]virt-v2v failed to convert VMware ESX VM with snapshot

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1171654>

Modify a file in virt-rescue with vi on some linux terminal such as yakuake, can lead to abnormal display in virt-rescue shell

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167623>

Remove "If reporting bugs, run virt-v2v with debugging enabled .." message when running virt-p2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1152819>

Can not end a running command in virt-rescue by press ^C or other keys, the only way is to exit virt-rescue

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.36

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.34.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New tools

Virt-tail is a new tool for following (tailing) log files within a
guest, similar to the regular C<tail -f> command.

=head3 New features in existing tools

Virt-customize, virt-get-kernel, virt-sparsify and virt-sysprep can
now handle encrypted guests (Pino Toscano).

Virt-builder and virt-customize now support I<--append-line>, which is
useful for adding lines to the end of configuration files.

Virt-resize can now shrink and expand swap partitions (Pino Toscano).

Virt-resize can now output to non-local disks (Pino Toscano).

Virt-sysprep has a new operation called C<backup-files> for removing
editor backups, and C<passwd-backups> for removing F</etc/passwd-> and
similar.

Virt-dib can now create checksums using the new I<--checksum> option
(Pino Toscano).

Virt-dib can now create tgz files.  In addition, extended attributes
and SELinux labels are preserved in the output tar file (Pino
Toscano).

Virt-dib can now create squashfs files (Pino Toscano).

Bash tab-completion is now available in every command line tool that
is shipped.

=head3 virt-v2v and virt-p2v

Conversions of Debian (6+) and Ubuntu (10.04+) guests are now
supported (Tomáš Golembiovský, Pino Toscano).

Conversions from SUSE Xen hypervisor have now been tested
(Cédric Bosdonnat).

Windows conversions may now install a program C<pnp_wait.exe> which
prevents conflicts between the Windows Plug-and-Play Manager and our
own scripts that install virtio device drivers.  Enabling this
requires the C<pnp_wait.exe> program to be built separately
(Roman Kagan).

OVA files exported from AWS can now be converted (Shahar Havivi).

When converting OVA files, in some circumstances virt-v2v can now read
disk images directly from the OVA input file instead of needing to
unpack the OVA file to a temporary directory.  This can save large
amounts of disk space, and is quicker (Tomáš Golembiovský).

Virt-p2v can now be built on RHEL 5 (2007-era) Linux and RHEL 6, which
means that 32 bit and hardware with ancient fakeraid disks can be
virtualized.  Binaries of virt-p2v based on these old versions of
RHEL can be found at http://oirase.annexia.org/virt-p2v/

Virt-p2v can now use nbdkit (an NBD server) as an alternative to
qemu-nbd.  In addition, virt-p2v can use "socket activation" which is
a more robust method for opening the NBD listening socket.  Socket
activation works with qemu-nbd or nbdkit, but requires the most up to
date versions.

To prevent timeouts during P2V conversions, virt-p2v inhibits power
saving on the physical machine, and also sends ping packets over the
ssh control and data connections.

Virt-v2v no longer removes the C<Processor> and C<Intelppm> nodes from
the Windows Registry.

Xen and vCenter conversions can now be done using the libvirt backend,
provided libvirt E<ge> 2.1.0 is used.

F</dev/srX> (SCSI CD-ROM) devices are ignored (Tomáš Golembiovský).

When converting SUSE Linux guests, use F</etc/modprobe.conf.local> if
it exists.

Removing VMware tools from Linux guests should now work reliably
(Pino Toscano).

When converting OVA files, virt-v2v now checks the disk image hash
contained in the manifest file, whereas previously it was ignored
because of a mistake in the code.  In addition, SHA256 hashes are now
supported (Tomáš Golembiovský).

When converting OVA files that contain compressed disk images, we now
trust the C<ovf:compression> attribute from the metadata instead of
using content sniffing on the disk image (Tomáš Golembiovský).

A new flag I<--vdsm-compat> has been added to I<-o vdsm> mode,
allowing more efficient qcow2 images to be generated.

Since the RHEV product [commercially supported version of oVirt] has
now been renamed to RHV, "RHEV" was changed to "RHV" throughout the
tooling.  In particular, I<-o rhev> becomes I<-o rhv>, although the
old name can be used for backwards compatibility.

The C<RHEV-APT> utility is only installed when the output hypervisor
is oVirt or RHV.

A problem with virt-v2v running out of memory when doing an SELinux
relabel of the guest filesystem should now be resolved.

=head3 Language bindings

Setting C<EXTRA_JAVAC_FLAGS> before F<./configure> allows you to
add arbitrary flags to C<javac> when compiling the Java bindings.

Use of any libguestfs API which returned a single struct, from Perl or
Java bindings, would have leaked memory.  This has now been fixed
(Pino Toscano).

=head3 Inspection

Inspection of Windows guests with mildly corrupted Windows Registry
hives should now work instead of failing with an error.  This feature
requires hivex E<ge> 1.3.14 (Dawid Zamirski).

For Debian guests, we can now read the URL, source name, summary and
full description of installed packages.  For RPM-based guests we can
read the URL, summary and description (Pino Toscano).

Inspection of guest operating systems that use a separate F</usr>
partition should now work more reliably (Pino Toscano).

When parsing guest F</etc/fstab>, paths are reduced to a canonical
form (eg. C<"///usr//local//"> → C<"/usr/local">).

Inspection of btrfs subvolumes now works where the F</etc/fstab>
options field contains commas.

F</dev/cdN> devices in guest F</etc/fstab> are ignored (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Stable releases are now tested on aarch64, ppc64 and ppc64le
architectures.

The RISC-V architecture is now handled as a guest, and libguestfs will
now at least compile on RISC-V (but probably not work as there is no
usable qemu at the time of writing).

Detection of S/390 and S/390x binaries and guests is now supported.

=head3 Other

ExFAT filesystems are now supported (Miles Wolbe).

=head2 Security

See also L<guestfs-security(1)>.

There were no CVEs reported in this development cycle.  However some
security-related hardening was carried out as described below.

Temporary filenames are now always generated using randomness from
F</dev/urandom> (previously the C function L<random(3)> was used in
one case).

The C<$TERM> environment variable is now validated before passing it
through to the appliance kernel command line.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_aug_transform>

Exposes the Augeas C<aug_transform> API (Pino Toscano).

=item C<guestfs_find_inode>

Find files by inode number (Matteo Cafasso).

=item C<guestfs_inspect_get_windows_software_hive>

=item C<guestfs_inspect_get_windows_system_hive>

Return the path to the Windows C<HKLM\SYSTEM> and C<HKLM\SOFTWARE>
hives computed during inspection.

=item C<guestfs_mksquashfs>

Create a squashfs filesystem from a path (Pino Toscano).

=back

=head3 Other API changes

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_add_domain>

This call now handles libvirt file-based volumes correctly, where
previously these would have been ignored.  Also handled are disks
which require libvirt authentication secrets to open (Pino Toscano).

=item C<guestfs_canonical_device_name>

This call will no longer incorrectly modify Linux software RAID device
names (like F</dev/mdX>).

=item C<guestfs_file_architecture>

Previously the C<file_architecture> API could return either of the
strings C<i386> or C<i486> for 32 bit x86 binaries.  It now only
returns C<i386> (as documented).

This API can now return the following new values: C<riscv32>,
C<riscv64>, C<riscv128>, C<s390>, C<s390x>.

=item C<guestfs_hivex_open>

This now has an optional C<GUESTFS_HIVEX_OPEN_UNSAFE> flag which
allows certain corrupted Windows Registry hives to be opened.  This
feature requires hivex E<ge> 1.3.14 (Dawid Zamirski).

=item C<guestfs_list_partitions>

This call now returns Linux software RAID partitions.

=item C<guestfs_part_to_dev>

This call now correctly handles partition names which include
C<pE<lt>NE<gt>> (Pino Toscano).

=item C<guestfs_set_label>

This call can now change the labels of swap partitions (Pino Toscano).

=back

=head2 Build changes

libmagic, the library part of the C<file> command, is now required at
build time (previously optional).

GCC 7 is now supported.

"Silent rules" are now used for OCaml programs, Java bindings.  To
show the full command line executed, add C<V=1> on the make command
line (Pino Toscano).

Slow testing (C<make check-slow>) now covers: firstboot scripts in
Linux guests; v2v conversion of a selection of real Linux guests; the
virt-customize I<--hostname> and I<--timezone> settings; the
I<--root-password> parameter; that the serial console works in
virt-builder guests.

Large generated C source files, eg. the list of commands found in
F<fish/cmds.c> (and many more), have been split into smaller files to
speed parallel compilation.

C<make maintainer-check-extra-dist> now checks that all generated
files are included in the tarball.

The tests no longer assume that C<.> is in Perl's C<@INC>, as it is
going to be removed soon (Pino Toscano).

Debian hosts using UsrMerge are now supported (Pino Toscano).

Header files and C structs can now have internal documentation using
the special C</** ... */> comments.

C<@VAR@> subtitutions in C<./run> are now fully quoted.  This is
necessary so that (eg) C<./configure PYTHON=/some/path> works robustly
if C</some/path> contains characters that need to be quoted (Hilko
Bengen).

gperf E<ge> 3.1 is now supported.

Kraxel's old edk2 builds can no longer be used for UEFI support.  UEFI
code is now fully free software, so use the versions bundled with your
Linux distro instead.

Virt-p2v can now be compiled on RHEL 5 (2007-era) Linux with Gtk 2.10.

=head2 Internals

The generator and mllib C<Common_utils> modules are now shared from
the same source file.

A considerable amount of common code has been moved into the F<common>
directory in the source and is now compiled only once.  The
mini-libraries located under here are: F<common/edit>,
F<common/errnostring>, F<common/miniexpect>, F<common/options>,
F<common/parallel>, F<common/progress>, F<common/protocol>,
F<common/utils>, F<common/visit>, F<common/windows>.

The directory containing the main library code has moved from F<src> →
F<lib>.

All tests written in shell script now use a common file of utility
functions (F<tests/test-functions.sh>).  There are several new utility
functions, mainly for skipping tests.  Also these test scripts can now
use autoconf-like path variables like C<$abs_top_srcdir>.

UEFI paths are now stored in the generator (F<generator/uefi.ml>).

The way the generator handles actions and procedure numbers was
changed quite substantially.  See F<generator/actions_*.ml> and
F<generator/proc_nr.ml>.

The gnulib C<getprogname> module is now used everywhere when
needing/printing the program name (Pino Toscano).

F<perl/Guestfs.c> is not translatable (Nikos Skalkotos).

Virt-builder templates moved from F<builder/website> to
F<builder/templates> and there is now a single unified program which
can build any template.

All Windows registry utilities used by virt-customize and virt-v2v
have been moved to a common module called C<Registry> under F<mllib>.

All POSIX bindings have been moved to a new module called
C<Unix_utils> under F<mllib>.

Inspection, virt-customize and virt-v2v no longer recompute the
Windows C<%systemroot%>, C<CurrentControlSet> or paths to the
C<HKLM\SYSTEM> and C<HKLM\SOFTWARE> hives in multiple places.  Instead
these are all computed once (during inspection) and passed to the
other tools through various C<guestfs_inspect_get_windows_*> APIs.

C</dev/pts> is now available inside the appliance, so any tools we run
which require a pty will now work (Pino Toscano).

Most OCaml warnings have been fixed.

There is now a single common function for creating temporary
files (C<guestfs_int_make_temp_path>) (Matteo Cafasso).

The C<$TERM> environment variable is now validated before passing it
through to the appliance kernel command line.

Useless USB and memballoon devices are no longer created in the
appliance (Laine Stump).

On aarch64 we now use virtio-pci for the appliance.  This is somewhat
faster than virtio-mmio.

Use of L<srandom(3)> and L<random(3)> has been minimized.  In
particular, temporary filenames are no longer created based on
randomness returned by L<random(3)>, but F</dev/urandom> is used
instead.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.34.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1425306>

typo error in virt-tail man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1418283>

virt-v2v: appliance runs out of memory running setfiles command

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1417549>

/usr/bin/x86_64-linux-gnu-ld.bfd.real: ../common/progress/.libs/libprogress.a(libprogress_la-progress.o): undefined reference to symbol 'UP@@NCURSES_TINFO_5.0.19991023'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1417444>

*** No rule to make target '../perl/lib/Sys/Guestfs.c', needed by 'libguestfs.pot'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1416941>

compile of 1.34.3 fails with gperf 3.1

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1414682>

guestfs_canonical_device_name incorrectly returns /dev/sd0 for MD devices (/dev/md0)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1414510>

guestfs_list_filesystems does not recognize ddf partitions

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1409023>

[Debian] ldmtool not installed in the appliance

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1404287>

qemu-kvm cannot boot RHEL 7 kernel with TCG, hangs at "Probing EDD (edd=off to disable)..."

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1404182>

RFE: virt-resize should support a URL as the outdisk

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1401474>

Importing VMs from VMware is failing with error "Inspection field 'i_arch' was 'unknown'"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1401320>

RFE: Increate virt-sysprep coverage a bit

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1400205>

Add --vdsm-compat=1.1 flag for VDSM

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1398070>

typo error in man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1392798>

secrets from libvirt domains are not read

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1390876>

"--machine-readable" info should be updated in virt-v2v manual page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1379289>

RFE: virt-p2v should support mnemonic operations

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1378022>

There is virt-v2v warning about <listen type='none'> during converting a guest which has listen type='none' in XML

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1377081>

virt-p2v manual should update the new dialog information

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1375157>

virt-v2v: -i ova: Permission denied when using libvirt and running as root

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1374651>

Can't install qxl driver for display device in win7 guest after converting to glance by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1374405>

There is HTTP 404 error info when convert guest to glance by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1374232>

selinux relabel fails on RHEL 6.2 guests with "libguestfs error: selinux_relabel: : Success"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1372668>

Process status is not normal in windows guest after converted from kvm to rhev by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1372269>

Builder does not set hostname properly for Debian 8 (Jessie)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1371843>

Improve OVA import compatibility

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1370424>

virt-manager coredump when vm with gluster image exists

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1367839>

Cannot import VMs from Xen and VMware when using RHEL7.3 host.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1367738>

Missing bash completion scripts for: virt-diff guestunmount virt-copy-in virt-copy-out virt-customize virt-get-kernel virt-p2v-make-disk virt-p2v-make-kickstart virt-tar-in virt-tar-out virt-v2v-copy-to-local virt-win-reg

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1367615>

OVMF file which is built for rhel7.3  can't be used for virt-v2v uefi conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1366456>

Converting rhel7 host installed on RAID:warning: fstrim: fstrim: /sysroot/: the discard operation is not supported

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1366049>

RFE: libvirt backend: support handling disks stored as volume name in a pool

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1365005>

Guest name is incorrect if convert guest from disk image by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1362649>

RFE: virt-sysprep does not utilize libguestfs encryption support

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1354507>

virt-v2v conversions from vCenter do not consistently obey the proxy environment variables

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1168144>

warning: fstrim: fstrim: /sysroot/: FITRIM ioctl failed: Operation not supported (ignored) when convert win2003 guest from xen server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1161019>

RFE: Only install RHEV-APT if virt-v2v -o rhev/-o vdsm option is used

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1152369>

virt-v2v failed to convert RHEL 6.7 UEFI guest: no grub1/grub-legacy or grub2 configuration file was found

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141631>

[RFE] virt-v2v should support convert a guest to a dir-pool with using pool's uuid

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1134878>

libvirt reports json "backing file" is missing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1019388>

firstboot scripts (virt-builder, virt-sysprep) don't work for Debian 6 & 7 guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/737600>

virt-v2v windows xp - machine dies BSOD - processr,sys - workaround provided

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.34

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.32.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

Multiple performance enhancements were made in libguestfs.  The "hot
cache" time to launch to appliance should be under 1 second assuming
recent qemu and kernel are installed.  There are also new utilities
for precisely benchmarking libguestfs (F<utils/boot-benchmark> and
F<utils/boot-analysis> in the source tree).

The virt-p2v tool for converting physical machines to virtual machines
was substantially improved.  This includes: clearer, coloured output
during conversions, support for Gtk 3, more detailed information about
hardware, click to identify network interfaces, more debugging tools
included with the ISO, and many bug fixes.

f2fs (Flash Friendly File System) is now supported (Pino Toscano).

=head3 New tools

L<virt-p2v-make-kiwi(1)> can be used to build the virt-p2v ISO based
on SLES and openSUSE, using the kiwi utility (Cédric Bosdonnat).

=head3 New features in existing tools

virt-resize will now preserve the GPT GUID.  This was required for
Windows Server 2012 R2, where the bootloader would become confused if
the GUID changed (Maxim Perevedentsev).

virt-resize will use sparse copying for (old MBR-style) extended
partitions.  This makes resizing of guests that use extended
partitions much faster (Maxim Perevedentsev).

virt-p2v kernel command line options can now be used to set defaults
for GUI configuration.

The virt-p2v debugging options have been completely removed,
simplifying the interface and documentation.  Debugging information is
now captured fully automatically.

virt-p2v-make-disk lets you specify an I<--arch> option, allowing you
to build a 32 bit virt-p2v, for compatibility with older systems.

virt-p2v-make-disk no longer requires that you specify an
C<os-version> for the virt-p2v disk.  If omitted it will try to choose
a suitable C<os-version> depending on your host system.

virt-p2v-make-disk and virt-p2v-make-kickstart both gain a new
I<--install> option that allows you to add arbitrary extra packages to
the virt-p2v ISO, for customization, additional debugging tools and so
on.

virt-v2v will now uninstall Parallels Tools (or the equivalent
Virtuozzo Tools) from Linux guests.  Also stop the Windows drivers
from loading at boot.  (Roman Kagan and Pavel Butsykin)

virt-v2v I<--in-place> mode has been enhanced to allow the caller to
choose whether or not to install certain virtio drivers in the guest
(Roman Kagan).

virt-v2v conversion of Windows guests was substantially rewritten and
simplified (Roman Kagan).

virt-v2v I<--in-place> mode now supports installing virtio-scsi
drivers in guests (Roman Kagan).

virt-v2v can now convert SUSE guests and SUSE guests using UEFI
(Cédric Bosdonnat and Jim Fehlig).

virt-v2v can now convert guests to Glance that have multiple disks.
Previously it would fail on such guests.

The virt-v2v I<--no-trim> and I<--vmtype> options are now no-ops.
They will print a warning but are otherwise ignored.  virt-v2v can now
generate the OVF vmtype correctly without user intervention.

virt-v2v has now been tested against SUSE Xen as a source hypervisor
(Cédric Bosdonnat).

virt-v2v adds support for SUSE VMDP drivers (Cédric Bosdonnat).

virt-v2v can convert OVA files containing subfolders, as produced
by SUSE Studio (Cédric Bosdonnat).

virt-v2v sets the OVF C<E<lt>OriginE<gt>> element correctly.  oVirt
has been extended to support more source hypervisors (Shahar Havivi).

virt-v2v now supports Windows Server 2016 (Tomáš Golembiovský).

The virt-builder I<--list> option can now be used to show all
templates or a single template (Pino Toscano).

All OCaml-based tools now use L<getopt_long(3)> for option parsing,
and I<--help> output has been improved (Pino Toscano).

virt-builder and virt-customize I<--selinux-relabel> option can now
fully relabel the guest filesystem at build time, without requiring a
lengthy autorelabel at first boot.

virt-customize I<--delete> now accepts globs.

New virt-customize I<--uninstall> option lets you uninstall packages.

virt-customize can now use C<pvvxsvc> as an alternative to C<rhsrvany>
for running firstboot scripts in Windows guests (Cédric Bosdonnat).

virt-customize now uses the strongest hashing scheme for passwords on
Arch and Void Linux (Pino Toscano).

virt-customize I<--install> now works correctly on Arch (Pino
Toscano).

virt-inspector has new options I<--no-applications> and I<--no-icon>
to prevent the list of applications and icon from being included in
the XML output (Pino Toscano).

New virt-sysprep I<--network> option has been added, allowing you to
actually use the I<--install> etc options which were present in
virt-sysprep before but did not usually work.  Note that the network
is still disabled by default.

virt-sysprep C<fs-uuids> operation no longer fails on btrfs guests
(Maxim Perevedentsev).

virt-dib can output Docker images (Pino Toscano).

virt-dib has a new I<--drive-format> option to allow the user to
specify the format of the helper drive (Pino Toscano).

All OCaml virt tools now have a I<--colors>/I<--colours> option which
enables coloured output (using ANSI escape sequences) even if the
output is not a tty.  The default is to check if the output is a tty
and disable coloured output if not.  This allows coloured output to be
consumed by other tools.

=head3 Language bindings

PHP test coverage has been enhanced (Pino Toscano).

PHP 7 is now supported (Pino Toscano).

Python bindings are now compliant with PEP 8 (Pino Toscano).

A Python pip package is available in
L<http://libguestfs.org/download/python/>

The Ruby bindings now print the full exception if one is thrown by the
event callback.  Note this is still incorrect behaviour as event
callbacks should not throw exceptions, but it aids debugging.

All OCaml libraries and programs are now compiled with
I<-safe-string>, if supported by the OCaml compiler.

=head3 Inspection

Alpine Linux using busybox can now be inspected.  Also the APK package
manager is supported in virt-customize (Pino Toscano).

We now handle inspection of Mageia 4 (Pino Toscano).

Void Linux and the Void Linux xbps package manager are fully supported
(Pino Toscano).

Parsing of CoreOS version information has been enhanced (Pino Toscano).

It is now possible to get an icon from ALT Linux (Pino Toscano).

PLD Linux versions E<lt> 3 are now recognized (Pino Toscano).

Windows drive letters are now returned for guests using GPT partitions
(Dawid Zamirski).

We can now correctly inspect Unix guests that do not have an
F</etc/fstab> file (Pino Toscano).

Added another source for the Ubuntu icon which doesn't rely on GNOME
having been installed in the guest.

We can now get an icon for Windows 7 64 bit guests.

Libosinfo integration was rewritten to deal with the new database
format used by osinfo (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Documentation

New manual page L<guestfs-building(1)> describes how to build
libguestfs from source.

The man pages, tools and tool I<--help> output is now automatically
checked to ensure that all tool options are properly documented, that
warning sections are included where necessary, and that every page has
a description section.

The L<guestfs-testing(1)> man page has been refreshed and based on a
newer libguestfs.

=head3 Architectures and platforms

virt-customize now works on POWER7 and POWER8 platforms, both big
endian and little endian (Xianghua Chen and Hu Zhang).

=head2 Security

See also L<guestfs-security(1)>.

=head3 CVE-2015-8869

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/CVE-2015-8869>

This vulnerability in OCaml might affect virt tools written in the
OCaml programming language.  It affects only 64 bit platforms.
Because this bug affects code generation it is difficult to predict
which precise software could be affected, and therefore our
recommendation is that you recompile libguestfs using a version of the
OCaml compiler where this bug has been fixed (or ask your Linux distro
to do the same).

=head3 virt-customize ownership of F<.ssh>, F<.ssh/authorized_keys>

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1337561>

Previously when virt-customize injected an SSH key into a guest, when
it created the F<~/.ssh> and F<~/.ssh/authorized_keys> directory and
file (in case they were missing) it created them with owner and group
C<root.root>.  This has been fixed so the correct user is used.  This
is not thought to have been exploitable.

=head3 Windows C<%systemroot%>

The inspection code has been made more robust against guests which
might use very long C<%systemroot%> (derived from the guest-controlled
Windows Registry).  This is not thought to have been exploitable.

=head3 Virtio-rng is now available in the appliance

virtio-rng (the virtual Random Number Generator device) is now passed
to the appliance, which should improve the quality random numbers
generated for GUIDs and cryptographic key generation.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<btrfs_filesystem_show>

List all devices where a btrfs filesystem is spanned (Pino Toscano).

=item C<download_blocks>

=item C<download_inode>

=item C<filesystem_walk>

Download filesystem data blocks from a given partition.  Download
arbitrary files by inode number.  Retrieve all files from a filesystem
including deleted files.

Note these require optional dependency The Sleuth Kit.  (Matteo
Cafasso)

=item C<get_sockdir>

Read the path where temporary sockets are stored (Pino Toscano).

=item C<mountable_device>

=item C<mountable_subvolume>

Split a Mountable into device name and subvolume
(Cédric Bosdonnat).

=item C<ntfscat_i>

Download NTFS file by inode number (Matteo Cafasso).

=item C<part_expand_gpt>

Allow in-place expanding of GPT partitions by moving the second
(backup) partition table to the end of the disk (Maxim Perevedentsev).

=item C<part_get_disk_guid>

=item C<part_set_disk_guid>

=item C<part_set_disk_guid_random>

Get and set the GPT disk GUID, or set it to a fresh random value
(Maxim Perevedentsev).

=item C<selinux_relabel>

SELinux-relabel part or all of the guest filesystem.

=back

=head3 Other API changes

C<guestfs_set_selinux>, C<guestfs_get_selinux>, C<guestfs_setcon>,
C<guestfs_getcon> and C<guestfs_llz> have been deprecated.  Use the
new API C<guestfs_selinux_relabel> to relabel filesystems.  Use
C<guestfs_lgetxattrs> to list the C<security.selinux> extended
attributes of existing files.

C<guestfs_vfs_minimum_size> can now be used on dirty filesystems
(Maxim Perevedentsev).

C<guestfs_ll> now works on paths which contain absolute symlinks
(Pino Toscano).

C<guestfs_glob_expand> now has an optional C<directoryslash> boolean
parameter which controls whether trailing slashes are returned for
directory names (Pino Toscano).

C<guestfs_lvs> will no longer return LVs which have the
C<activationskip> flag set.  The reason is that such LVs have no
C</dev/VG/LV> device node and so code which read the list of LVs and
then probed the devices themselves would immediately fail.  You can
use C<guestfs_lvs_full> if you want to read all LVs.
(Pino Toscano).

C<guestfs_list_disk_labels> now no longer fails if no disks with
labels were added.  Instead it now returns an empty list (Pino
Toscano).

C<guestfs_is_lv> no longer fails if passed a btrfs subvolume, it
returns false instead (Maxim Perevedentsev).

=head2 Build changes

qemu E<ge> 1.3.0 is required.

yajl (a JSON parsing library) is required to build libguestfs.

You can now build with GCC 6.

C<make check-valgrind> now has substantially better coverage.

C<make check-slow> now works again.

Use C<make -C appliance clean-supermin-appliance> to clean the
supermin appliance (it will be rebuilt on next C<make>).

There are a variety of new rules for running virt-p2v from the source
directory: C<make -C p2v run-virt-p2v-directly> |
C<run-virt-p2v-in-a-vm> | C<run-virt-p2v-non-gui-conversion>.  These
are documented further in L<guestfs-hacking(1)>.

virt-p2v may be built using either Gtk 2 or Gtk 3.  To force a
particular version of Gtk to be used, C<./configure --with-gtk=2|3>

The C<./configure> options are now mostly documented in
L<guestfs-building(1)>.

=head2 Internals

In git, versions are now tagged with C<v1.XX.YY> (previously they were
tagged with C<1.XX.YY>).  Using the C<v-> prefix is more common in git
repositories.

When using the libvirt backend, we now wait for qemu to exit
gracefully instead of killing it after 15 seconds.  This helps when
writing to slow devices (especially cheap USB keys).

Error messages from libvirt now include the C<err-E<gt>int1> field
which usually contains the C<errno>.

On ARM, all DTB (device tree) code has been removed.  qemu creates the
right device tree on the fly, we do not need to specify one.

The C API tests now use larger test disks, allowing BTRFS to be tested
properly (Pino Toscano).

The tests should now work on a pure Python 3 host (Pino Toscano).

In C bindings, internal functions are now (mostly) consistently named
C<guestfs_int_*> whereas previously there was no consistent scheme.

The old C<safe_malloc> etc functions are now no longer exported by the
library, nor used in language bindings.

Setting TMPDIR to a path longer than ~ 100 characters will no longer
cause libguestfs to fail silently and randomly when creating Unix
domain sockets (Pino Toscano).

The C<COMPILE_REGEXP> macro can now be used in the daemon.

When tracing, results containing structs are now printed in full (Pino
Toscano).

The Perl C<Sys::Guestfs> module now no longer embeds an incrementing
API "version number".  This module is now always at phony version
"1.0".  To find the real version of libguestfs from Perl you must call
C<$g-E<gt>version>.

All code is compiled with C<-Wstack-usage=10000> and multiple changes
have been made to remove stack allocation of large strings and
buffers.

The L<error(3)> function is now used everywhere, replacing most
previous uses of L<perror(3)> + L<exit(3)>, and L<fprintf(3)> + exit.

In C code, C</**> comments are turned into documentation which is
automatically added to the L<guestfs-hacking(1)> manual page.

A safe "getumask" function has been added.  For recent Linux kernels
this uses the newly added C<Umask> field in F</proc/self/status>.  For
older Linux and other Unix, this uses a thread-safe technique
involving L<fork(2)> (thanks: Josh Stone, Jiri Jaburek, Eric Blake).

Safe L<posix_fadvise(2)> wrappers have been added, and more hints have
been added to the code which may make a minor difference to
performance.

A safe wrapper around L<waitpid(2)> has been added which handles
C<INTR> properly.

C<podwrapper.pl> (used to generate the manual pages) now stops if any
POD error is found.  A new script called C<podcheck.pl> does
cross-checking of I<--help> output, tool options and manual pages.

All version numbers in the library (eg. versions of qemu, versions of
libvirt, versions of guest operating systems) are unified in a single
file F<src/version.c> (Pino Toscano).

On Windows guests, virt-customize will use the vendor-neutral path
S<C<C:\Program Files\Guestfs\Firstboot>> to store firstboot scripts.
Previously it used S<C<C:\Program Files\Red Hat\Firstboot>>.  This
change should be invisible to the scripts themselves.
(Cédric Bosdonnat)

On Linux guests, the firstboot services generated by virt-builder
I<--firstboot> etc have been renamed to C<guestfs-firstboot>
(Pino Toscano).

There is now a common C<debug> function used by all OCaml tools,
replacing previous code which did S<C<if verbose () then printf ...>>.

virt-p2v copies files it needs over to the virt-v2v conversion server
using L<scp(1)>, instead of trying to send them via the shell session.
This should improve reliability and should be a completely transparent
to end users.

All code in F<mllib> is now built into a single C<mllib.cma> or
C<mllib.cmxa> library.  All code in F<customize> is now built into a
single C<customize.cma> or C<customize.cmxa> library.  This simplifies
the build of the OCaml tools.

L<lvmetad(8)> is now used in the appliance when available (Pino Toscano).

"Silent rules" are used for OCaml, Java, Erlang and POD.  Use
C<make V=1> to see the full command lines again (Pino Toscano).

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.32.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1364347>

virt-sparsify --in-place failed with UEFI system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1362357>

run_command runs exit handlers when execve fails (e.g. due to missing executable)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1362354>

virt-dib failed to create image using DIB_YUM_REPO_CONF

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1359652>

Fail to inspect Windows ISO file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1358142>

Some info will show when convert guest to libvirt by virt-v2v with parameter --quiet

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1354335>

overlay of disk images does not specify the format of the backing file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1352761>

Virt-manager can't show OS icons of win7/win8/ubuntu guest.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1350363>

Improve error info "remote server timeout unexpectedly waiting for password prompt" when connect to a bogus server at p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1348900>

virt-p2v should update error prompt when 'Test connection' with a non-existing user in conversion server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1345813>

virt-sysprep --install always failed to install the packages specified

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1345809>

virt-customize --truncate-recursive should give an error message when specifying a no-existing path

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1343423>

[RFE]Should give a better description about 'curl error 22' when failed using ssh identity http url at p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1343414>

Failed SSH to conversion server by ssh identity http url at p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1343375>

[RFE] uninstall packages inside the VM

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1342447>

Ifconfig command is not supported on p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1342398>

Convert a guest from RHEL by virt-v2v but its origin info shows RHEV at rhevm

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1342337>

Should remind a warning about disk image has a partition when using virt-p2v-make-disk

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1341984>

virt-get-kernel prompts an 'invalid value' error when using --format auto

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1341564>

virt-p2v spinner should be hidden when it stops spinning

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1340809>

Testing connection timeout when input regular user of conversion server with checked "use sudo......"button

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1340464>

[RFE] Suggestion give user a reminder for "Cancel conversion" button

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1340407>

Multiple network ports will not be aligned at p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1338083>

Update UEFI whitelist for official fedora packages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1337561>

virt-customize --ssh-inject not applying correct file permission

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1335671>

extra quotes around UUID confuses findfs in RHEL (but not in Fedora)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1332025>

Inspection does not parse /etc/redhat-release containing "Derived from Red Hat Enterprise Linux 7.1 (Source)"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1327488>

RFE: Allow p2v kernel options without p2v.server to set defaults

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1325825>

virt-v2v should prevent using multiple '-b' and '-n' option appears on the command line

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1321620>

libguestfs: error: could not parse integer in version number: 7"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1321338>

[1.33.16] Compilation Error: Unbound value List.sort_uniq in v2v.ml line 988, characters 10-24:

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1317843>

`virt-builder --update` fails with: "dnf -y --best upgrade: command exited with an error"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1316479>

v2v cmd cannot exit and "block I/O error in device 'appliance': No space left on device (28)" is printed when specified "-v -x"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1316041>

virt-rescue fails, but missing error message

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1314244>

RFE: virt-p2v log window should process colour escapes and backspaces

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1312254>

virt-v2v -o libvirt doesn't preserve or use correct <graphics type="vnc|spice">

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1309706>

error: internal error: Invalid floppy device name: hdb

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1309619>

Wrong warning info "use standard VGA" shows when converting windows > 7 by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1309580>

OS name of win8.1 x64 guest shows incorrect in rhevm3.6 general info

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1308769>

virt-v2v does not copy additional disks to Glance

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1306666>

Failure when disk contains an LV with activationskip=y

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1296606>

virt-v2v doesn't remove VirtualBox additions correctly because of file quoting

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1293527>

There should be a reminder to avoid user to edit a guest image by multiple tools at the same time in guestfish man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1293276>

guestfish can not ll a symbolic link dir or edit a file in it

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1278878>

guestfish should be able to handle LVM thin layouts

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1264835>

ppc64le: virt-customize --install fail to detect the guest arch

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1264332>

Test that trimming in virt-v2v doesn't regress

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1232192>

Virt-v2v gives an error on a blank disk: part_get_parttype: unknown signature, of the output: BYT;

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229386>

virt-p2v in non-GUI mode doesn't show any conversion progress or status

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1227599>

P2V invalid password prints unexpected end of file waiting for command prompt.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1224795>

On Ubuntu, virt-builder --install and --update cannot use the network

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1213324>

virt-v2v: warning: unknown guest operating system: windows windows 6.3 when converting win8,win8.1,win2012,win2012R2,win10 to rhev

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1203898>

Support inspecting docker images without /etc/fstab

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1186935>

libguestfs cannot inspect recent Fedora / RHEL >= 7 when /usr is a separate partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167916>

P2V: invalid conversion server prints unexpected end of file waiting for password prompt.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1152825>

virt-rescue --selinux can not work well, when enable selinux in the command line the value of 'getenforce' is still Disabled in virt-rescue appliance

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150298>

ARM 32 bit on Ubuntu: warning: cast to pointer from integer of different size [-Wint-to-pointer-cast]

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1089100>

NetworkManager avc unlink denied for resolv.conf after using --selinux-relabel

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/983969>

RFE: virt-sysprep should be SELinux-aware

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/855058>

RFE: virt-p2v: display more information about storage devices

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/554829>

SELinux handling could be done better.

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.32

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.30.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New tools

The new L<virt-v2v-copy-to-local(1)> tool is an ancillary tool for
L<virt-v2v(1)> allowing you to convert source guests that virt-v2v is
unable to access directly.

=head3 New features in existing tools

Virt-customize knows how to write a random seed to CirrOS (Pino Toscano).

On Fedora, virt-customize runs L<dnf(8)> with the I<--best> flag,
ensuring it always updates to the latest available packages.

Virt-builder now provides 32 bit Fedora templates.

Virt-builder and virt-customize I<--install> option now works on 32
bit Fedora guests.  Previously it would try to install 64 bit
packages (Jan Sedlák).

Virt-builder can now fetch cloud images using Simple Streams v1.0
metadata (Pino Toscano).

Virt-builder can now fetch openSUSE cloud images out of the box
(Cédric Bosdonnat).

Virt-customize will now use stronger (SHA-512) encrypted passwords by
default on openSUSE E<ge> 11 (Pino Toscano).

Virt-builder will now correctly handle output filenames containing
colon characters (C<:>), and will create temporary files in the
libguestfs cache directory instead of defaulting to F</tmp>
(Pino Toscano).

Virt-resize has a new I<--unknown-filesystems> option to control what
to do when asked to resize a filesystem that libguestfs doesn't know
how to resize.

Virt-v2v now has an I<--in-place> flag/mode, allowing in-place
conversion of guests (Roman Kagan).

Virt-v2v has a I<--compressed> option for creating compressed qcow2
output files.

Virt-v2v can now correctly get the VMware datacenter path (dcPath)
from libvirt, instead of having to calculate it using an algorithm
that occasionally got the wrong answer (Matthias Bolte, Tingting
Zheng).

Virt-v2v now processes RAM sizes correctly for 64 bit guests when
running on a 32 bit host.

=head3 Language bindings

In Perl and Python programs, the C<get_program_name> API now returns
the true program name, instead of the incorrect string C<perl> or
C<python>.

The Python bindings can now be compiled against a different version of
libguestfs, allowing the pip module to be built against any version of
libguestfs (instead of requiring the pip module and libguestfs to have
exactly the same version).

The quality of the Ruby rdoc (documentation) has been improved (Pino
Toscano).

Perl scripts no longer hard-code the location of perl in the shebang
line, but use L<env(1)> to locate it instead (Pino Toscano).

In OCaml programs, the guestfs handle was incorrectly made into a
global root, meaning it could never be garbage collected.  If you
didn't call the C<close> function explicitly, the handle would not be
closed until the whole program exited.  This has now been fixed so
handles will be garbage collected in the usual way.  This changes the
API of the OCaml function C<Guestfs.event_callback>.  Note that non-C
language bindings are not covered by the libguestfs API/ABI guarantee,
although we try hard not to change them, but in this case it was
essential in order to fix this very serious bug.

=head3 Inspection

Alpine Linux and the APK package manager, ALT Linux, Frugalware, and
PLD Linux are now recognized (Pino Toscano).

If it exists, F</etc/os-release> will be preferred for inspecting
Linux guests (Pino Toscano).

The correct kernel version is returned for Windows guests E<ge> 10.

=head3 Documentation

The large L<guestfs(3)> man page has been split into several separate
man pages: L<guestfs-hacking(1)> L<guestfs-internals(1)>
L<guestfs-security(1)>.  In the source tree, a new F<docs> directory
contains this documentation.

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Libguestfs now supports ARM 64 bit platforms with vGICv3.

=head2 Security

See also L<guestfs-security(1)>.

=over 4

=item C<CVE-2015-5745>

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1251157>

This is not a vulnerability in libguestfs, but because we always give
a virtio-serial port to each guest (since that is how guest-host
communication happens), an escalation from the appliance to the host
qemu process is possible.  This could affect you if:

=over 4

=item *

your libguestfs program runs untrusted programs out of the guest
(using L</guestfs_sh> etc), or

=item *

another exploit was found in (for example) kernel filesystem code that
allowed a malformed filesystem to take over the appliance.

=back

If you use sVirt to confine qemu, that would thwart some attacks.

=item Virt-customize permissions on F<.ssh>, F<.ssh/authorized_keys>

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1260778>.

Previously when asked to inject an SSH key into a guest,
virt-customize (hence virt-builder too) would create the F<.ssh>
directory and F<.ssh/authorized_keys> file with too broad permissions,
allowing other users to read.  They are now created as C<0700> and
C<0600> respectively, which is the same as the L<ssh-copy-id(1)>
utility.

=back

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_get_identifier>

=item C<guestfs_set_identifier>

Get/set a per-handle identifier.  The main effect of this is to
change trace output from:

 libguestfs: trace: foo

to:

 libguestfs: trace: ID: foo

making it easier to follow traces in multi-threaded programs, or where
a program uses multiple handles (especially virt-v2v).

=item C<guestfs_vfs_minimum_size>

Return the minimum size of a filesystem (when shrunk).  This supports
ext2/3/4, XFS and btrfs, and can support other filesystem types in
future (Maxim Perevedentsev).

=back

=head3 Other API changes

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_disk_create>: add C<preallocation> = C<off>/C<metadata>/C<full>.

For raw, this allows C<off> as a synonym for C<sparse> (making it
consistent with qcow2).  For qcow2, this allows C<sparse> as a synonym
for C<off>.

It also adds C<full>, which corresponds to fully allocated, but uses
L<posix_fallocate(3)> for efficiency.

=item C<guestfs_tar_in>: new C<xattrs>, C<selinux>, C<acl> parameters.

=item C<guestfs_tar_out>: new C<xattrs>, C<selinux>, C<acl> parameters.

These extra parameters control whether extended attributes, SELinux
contexts and/or POSIX ACLs are restored from / saved to tarballs.

=item C<guestfs_add_drive>

The existing C<username> and C<secret> parameters can be used to
supply authentication for iSCSI (Pino Toscano).

=back

=head2 Build changes

The C<./configure --enable-valgrind-daemon> option has been removed.

You can no longer build libguestfs on RHEL 5-era (c.2007) machines.
See the C<oldlinux> branch if you need (limited) RHEL 5 support.

Virt-p2v can now be built on RHEL 6-era (c.2010) Linux distros.

OCaml E<ge> 3.11 (released in 2008) is now required to build from git.

Building the Perl bindings now requires C<Module::Build> (instead of
C<ExtUtils::MakeMaker>).

Builds should be faster (especially when incrementally rebuilding),
because work was done to reduce build times.

Both OCaml and the OCaml findlib module are required if you need to
run the generator at build time.  Previously the build would have
failed if findlib was not installed.

C<make check> tests now run in parallel (within each test directory).

C<make install> no longer installs OCaml F<bindtests.*> files
incorrectly.

C<make install> can now be run twice.  Previously it would fail on the
second run.

C<make clean> should now remove nearly every file that C<make>
creates.

A new C<make installcheck> rule has been added, allowing the installed
copy of libguestfs to be tested.

=head2 Internals

Some effort was put into minimizing the size of the appliance, which
reduces temporary disk space and time needed by libguestfs handles.

The appliance now passes the NIC name to dhcpd, fixing hangs when
running the appliance on some distros (Cédric Bosdonnat).

OCaml C<Guestfs.Errno> is now generated (Pino Toscano).

In OCaml tools, common code now handles I<--debug-gc>, I<--verbose>
and other common options (Roman Kagan, Pino Toscano).

The virt-v2v test harness allows us to boot the test guests at fixed
dates in the past, ensuring that Windows reactivation doesn't kick in.

There is a new internal API for reading/writing a subprocess via a
pipe from library code.

Used C<deheader> program to remove unused C<#include> directives.

In OCaml tools, the C<Char> and C<String> modules now implicitly
reference the C<Common_utils.Char> and C<Common_utils.String> modules
(instead of the ones from stdlib).  The C<Common_utils> modules
contain a number of extra char/string utility functions, and also hide
some unsafe functions in stdlib.

Many more virt-v2v tests will now be run even if you don't have
rhsrvany and virtio-win installed (Roman Kagan).

The huge F<configure.ac> file has been split into several smaller
files called F<m4/guestfs_*.m4>.

The old F<tests/data> and F<tests/guests> directories have been moved
to F<test-data/>.  This new top level directory carries all test data
which is common, large and/or shared between multiple tests.

There is a new top level F<website/> directory containing the public
L<http://libguestfs.org> website (or most of it).

The fuzz testing of inspection (F<tests/fuzz>) has been removed.

Virt-p2v now saves the source physical machine dmesg output into the
conversion server debug directory, making it simpler to debug cases of
missing drivers, firmware etc.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.30.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1294956>

set-label returns wrong error message when set the ext3/ext4 filesystem label

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1288733>

Add a Fedora 23 32-bit base image for virt-builder

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1288201>

virt-builder writes temporary files to /tmp

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1285847>

virt-resize does not copy logical partitions

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1281578>

virt-inspector returns version 6.3 for win10 images (should return 10.0)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1281577>

virt-inspector --xpath segfault on attribute get

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1280029>

libguestfs can run commands with stdin not open (or worse still, connected to arbitrary guest-chosen random devices)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1279273>

About compression option for qcow2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1278878>

guestfish should be able to handle LVM thin layouts

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1278382>

DNF python programming error when run from virt-builder

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1278371>

inspection returns arch="unknown" for Windows guest if file command is not installed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1277274>

Document permissions needed for non-admin users to use virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1277122>

RFE: virt-sparsify: make '--in-place' sparsification safe to abort (gracefully or ungracefully)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1277074>

Virt-p2v client shouldn't present the vdsm option because it's not usable

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1276540>

virt-v2v fails to convert Windows raw image: error "device name is not a partition"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1275806>

virt-builder: error: [file] is not a regular file in the guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1270011>

Simplestreams test fails: virt-builder: error: the value for the key 'size' is not an integer

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1267032>

guestfish copy-in command behaves oddly/unexpectedly with wildcards

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1262983>

python: Cannot compile pip module if installed libguestfs != pip guestfs version

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1262127>

Better diagnostic message when virbr0 doesn't exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1261436>

No warning shows when convert a win7 guest with AVG AntiVirus installed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1260778>

virt-builder --ssh-inject doesn't set proper permissions on created files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1260689>

RFE: V2V to check and warn user to disable group policy and anti virus on Windows guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1260590>

Wrong graphics protocal and video type set for guest after convert to rhev 3.6 by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1258342>

extra slashes in vcenter URL confuses virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1257895>

[RHEV][V2V] virt-v2v ignores NIC if interface source/@network or source/@bridge is an empty string

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1256405>

virt-builder created Fedora 22 32bit disk image cannot be updated

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1256222>

virt-p2v no GUI mode:error opening control connection to $ip:22:unexpected …rompt

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1251909>

Option -oa preallocated -of qcow2 of virt-v2v didn't work efficiently

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1250715>

v2v: spaces need to be escaped as %20 in paths

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1248678>

Close all incoming ports on virt-p2v ISO

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1246882>

man virt-customize shows synopsis twice

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1242853>

mount-loop failed to setup loop device: No such file or directory

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1237136>

BUG: unable to handle kernel NULL pointer dereference at <addr> in function __blkg_lookup

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1230412>

virt-v2v should ignore bogus kernel entries in grub config

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229119>

Unrelated info in fstab makes virt-v2v fail with unclear error info

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1227609>

virt-p2v: Using "Back" button causes output list to be repopulated multiple times

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1225789>

Wrong video driver is installed for rhel5.11 guest after conversion to libvirt

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1204131>

RFE: virt-builder creates qcow v3 images, add build option for qcow v2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1176801>

File /etc/sysconfig/kernel isn't updated when convert XenPV guest with regular kernel installed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174551>

"lstatnslist" and "lstatlist" don't give an error if the API is used wrongly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1168223>

koji spin-livecd cannot build a working live CD

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165785>

mount-loop command fails: mount failed: Unknown error -1

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164708>

set-label can only set <=127 bytes for btrfs and <=126 bytes for ntfs filesystem which not meet the help message. Also for ntfs it should give a warning message when the length >128 bytes

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1020216>

libvirt fails to shut down domain: could not destroy libvirt domain: Requested operation is not valid: domain is not running

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1011907>

mount-loop failed to setup loop device: No such file or directory

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.30

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.28.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New tools

L<virt-dib(1)> is a secure and safe alternative to the OpenStack
"diskimage-builder" tool.  It is compatible with diskimage-builder
elements.  (Pino Toscano)

L<virt-get-kernel(1)> extracts the kernel and ramdisk from a disk
image.  Previously this functionality was part of L<virt-builder(1)>,
but the new tool is more featureful.  (Pino Toscano)

=head3 New features in existing tools

L<virt-v2v(1)> I<-i ova> mode can now read a wider range of OVA files,
and also unpacked files (directories).

virt-v2v now securely passes options to curl, so passwords, cookies
and so on cannot be seen by users with shell access on the same
machine.

virt-v2v has a new I<--password-file> option to allow you to securely
pass in a password, and to avoid an interactive prompt.

virt-v2v disables Windows autoreboot, making debugging conversion
failures on Windows easier.

virt-v2v now comes with an extensive external test suite.
See L<virt-v2v-test-harness(1)>.

virt-v2v allows virtio drivers to come from any location (Roman
Kagan), and drivers can be read directly from the virtio ISO.

virt-v2v supports conversion of Windows E<ge> 8.  Note this is
experimental, and possibly broken.  Use with caution.

virt-v2v can now convert UEFI guests.

L<virt-p2v(1)> adds a network configuration dialog.

virt-p2v now has C<p2v.pre>, C<p2v.post> and C<p2v.fail> triggers,
allowing arbitrary scripts for preparing the host for conversion and
tidying up post-conversion.

virt-p2v now uses the more advanced metacity window manager
(instead of matchbox).

L<virt-sysprep(1)> will remove C</var/spool/mail/username> for
non-root accounts (Hu Tao).

L<virt-customize(1)>, L<virt-builder(1)> and virt-sysprep have the
following new options:

=over 4

=item I<--commands-from-file>

allow long lists of commands to be read from a file instead of from
the command line (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--copy>

copy files inside the guest (Maros Zatko)

=item I<--copy-in>

copy host files recursively into the guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--move>

move files inside the guest (Maros Zatko)

=item I<--ssh-inject>

inject SSH keys into a guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--sm-attach>

=item I<--sm-credentials>

=item I<--sm-register>

=item I<--sm-remove>

=item I<--sm-unregister>

register and unregister a guest from subscription-manager
(Pino Toscano)

=item I<--touch>

touch a file in the guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--truncate>

=item I<--truncate-recursive>

truncate files (Maros Zatko)

=back

Improvements to virt-customize firstboot support.  In particular,
Windows firstboot should work as well as Linux (Roman Kagan).

L<virt-df(1)> can now use PolicyKit, SASL and other authentication
methods when getting the list of domains from libvirt.

Improvements to guestfish bash completion (Pino Toscano).

Bash completion now completes short options as well as long options
(Pino Toscano).

L<guestfish(1)> now displays a command synopsis if the number of
parameters given to a command is wrong (Hu Tao).

virt-builder now supports Red Hat Enterprise Linux versions back to RHEL 3.

virt-builder supports SUSE guests using zypper (Cédric Bosdonnat).

=head3 Language bindings

The Java bindings now include validated Javadoc, and other improvements
(Pino Toscano).

Multiple fixes and improvements to the PHP bindings (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Inspection

Inspection can now get icons from RHEL 7 and CentOS 7.

F</etc/favicon.png> is now allowed to be a symbolic link.

For RPM-based guests, inspection now returns RPM Epoch fields.

Debian packages now have separate Epoch and Version fields
(Nikos Skalkotos).

OpenBSD detection added, FreeBSD and NetBSD added as separate
"distros", and other BSD inspection improvements and bug fixes
(Nikos Skalkotos).

CoreOS detection added (Nikos Skalkotos).

The package manager in Fedora E<ge> 22 is C<dnf>.

ReactOS guests can be inspected (Maros Zatko).

Add support for UEFI guests.

Inspection now works when kernel modules are gzip or xz compressed
(Pino Toscano).

Inspection now recognizes ppc64 and ppc64le guests (Maros Zatko).

Inspection lists the installed applications on Archlinux guests
(Nikos Skalkotos).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

PPC64 (POWER7) and PPC64LE (POWER8) architectures are now much better
supported, and should work out of the box.

For aarch64, we use AAVMF (an open source UEFI implementation based on
OVMF) if available to run the appliance.

For armv7, we now use the I<-M virt> machine type by default.

There is better support for compiling on non-Linux platforms
(Pino Toscano, Margaret Lewicka).

Libguestfs should now work on MIPS 32 bit little endian ("mipsel").  I
have not been able to try 64 bit or big endian.

=head2 Security

=over 4

=item CVE-2014-8484

=item CVE-2014-8485

Libguestfs previously ran the L<strings(1)> utility on untrusted
files.  Strings could parse BFD headers in an unsafe way, leading to
possible arbitrary code execution.  Libguestfs now runs strings with a
flag to ensure it does not try to parse BFD headers.  This could have
led to exploitation of the libguestfs appliance, but since libguestfs
further constrains the appliance through virtualization, SELinux and
other techniques, it was unlikely to have caused any privilege
escalation on the host.

=item XPath injection in virt-v2v

One possible XPath injection vulnerability was fixed in virt-v2v.
This might have allowed a malicious guest which was being converted by
virt-v2v to construct an arbitrary XPath expression which would have
been evaluated on the host (by the libxml2 library linked to the
virt-v2v binary).  It is not clear what the effects of this might be.

For further information, see upstream commit
L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/commit/6c6ce85f94c36803fe2db35a98db436bff0c14b0>

=item Denial of service problems when using C<qemu-img info>

When using the American Fuzzy Lop fuzzer (C<afl-fuzz>) on the
C<qemu-img info> command, Richard W.M. Jones found that certain files
can cause the C<qemu-img> program to use lots of memory and time (for
example 6GB of heap and 14 seconds of CPU time on a fast Intel
processor), and in some cases to crash.  Since libguestfs may run
C<qemu-img info> on disk images to find out what they contain, this
transitively could cause libguestfs to hang or consume lots of memory.

Libguestfs was modified so that it uses resource limits to limit the
space and time used by C<qemu-img info>, to avoid this problem.  If a
malicious user tries to pass one of these disk images to libguestfs,
C<qemu-img> will crash and the crash is reported back to libguestfs
callers as an error message.




=back

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_add_libvirt_dom>

This exposes a previously private API that allows you to pass a
C<virDomainPtr> object directly from libvirt to libguestfs.

=item C<guestfs_blockdev_setra>

Adjust readahead parameter for devices.
See C<blockdev --setra> command.

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_cancel>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_pause>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_resume>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_status>

Balance support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_filesystem_defragment>

Filesystem defragmentation support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_image>

Create an image of a Btrfs filesystem (Chen Hanxiao)

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_assign>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_create>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_destroy>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_limit>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_remove>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_show>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_quota_enable>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_quota_rescan>

Quote support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_rescue_chunk_recover>

Scan and recover the chunk tree in Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_rescue_super_recover>

Restore superblocks in Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_replace>

Replace a device in a Btrfs filesystem (Cao Jin).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_cancel>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_resume>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_status>

Scrub a Btrfs filesystem (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_get_default>

Get the default subvolume of a Btrfs filesystem (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_show>

List detailed information about the subvolume of a Btrfs filesystem
(Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_enable_extended_inode_refs>

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_enable_skinny_metadata_extent_refs>

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_seeding>

Various tuning parameters for Btrfs filesystems (Chen Hanxiao).

=item C<guestfs_c_pointer>

Return the C pointer to the underlying C<guestfs_h *>.  This allows
interworking of libguestfs bindings with bindings from other
libraries.  For further information see
L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1075164>

=item C<guestfs_copy_in>

=item C<guestfs_copy_out>

Flexible APIs for recursively copying directories of files between the
host and guest filesystem.  Previously these were available only as
guestfish commands, but now any API users can call them (Pino Toscano).

=item C<guestfs_part_get_gpt_guid>

=item C<guestfs_part_set_gpt_guid>

Get and set the GPT per-partition GUID.

=item C<guestfs_part_get_mbr_part_type>

Get MBR partition type (Chen Hanxiao).

=item C<guestfs_set_uuid_random>

Set the UUID of a filesystem to a randomly generated value; supported
filesystems currently are ext2/3/4, XFS, Btrfs, and swap partitions.
(Chen Hanxiao).

=back

=head3 Other API changes

C<guestfs_disk_create> can now use VMDK files as backing files.

C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_snapshot> takes extra optional
parameters (all added by Hu Tao):

=over 4

=item C<ro>

for creating a read-only Btrfs snapshot

=item C<qgroupid>

for adding the snapshot to a qgroup

=back

C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_create> can also take the optional
C<qgroupid> parameter (Hu Tao).

C<guestfs_set_uuid> can set UUID of swap partitions, Btrfs
(Hu Tao, Chen Hanxiao).

C<guestfs_copy_device_to_file> and C<guestfs_copy_file_to_file> have a
new optional C<append> parameter, allowing you to append to the output
file instead of truncating it.

C<guestfs_mkfs> has a new optional C<label> parameter to set the
initial label of the new filesystem (Pino Toscano).

C<guestfs_set_label> and C<guestfs_set_uuid> now set C<ENOTSUP> as errno
when there is no implemented support for the filesystem of the specified
mountable (Chen Hanxiao).

Environment variables now let you write C<LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG=true>,
C<LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG=0> and so on.

All C<guestfs_sfdisk*> APIs have been deprecated.  Because
L<sfdisk(8)> was rewritten, incompatibly, upstream, we don't recommend
using these APIs in future code.  Use the C<guestfs_part*> APIs as
replacements.

APIs such as C<guestfs_download> do not truncate F</dev/stdout> or
F</dev/stderr> when writing to them, meaning that if you redirect
stdout or stderr to a file, the file is no longer truncated.





=head2 Build changes

The daemon no longer uses its own separate copy of gnulib.  Instead it
shares a single copy with the library.

OCaml F<.annot> files are now created, so IDEs and editors like emacs
and vi can browse OCaml types in the source code.

Various fixes to allow different host/appliance architecture builds
(Pino Toscano).

Automake is now used directly to build all the OCaml programs, instead
of ad hoc Makefile rules.  One side effect of this is to enable
warnings in all the C code used by OCaml programs.

C<-fno-strict-overflow> is used throughout the build to avoid dubious
GCC optimizations.

Multiple cleanups to support GCC 5.

OCaml OUnit2 is needed to run some OCaml tests.

Creating a statically linked F<libguestfs.a> should work again.

The F<src/api-support> subdirectory and its scripts are no longer
used.  Instead we store in the F<generator/actions.ml> when the API
was added to libguestfs.

=head2 Internationalization

The translation service has changed from Transifex to Zanata.

Many more translations are available now, for both library and tools
messages and documentation.

=head2 Internals

In all OCaml tools, there are now common C<error>, C<warning>, C<info>
functions, and common way to set and get the I<--quiet>, I<-x> (trace)
and I<-v> (verbose) flags, and colour highlighting used consistently.

C<COMPILE_REGEXP> macros are used to simplify PCRE constructors and
destructors.

In the generator, C<Pointer> arguments have finally been implemented.

Internal identifiers no longer use double and triple underscores
(eg. C<guestfs___program_name>).  These identifiers are invalid for
C99 and C++ programs, although compilers would accept them.

The daemon no longer parses C<guestfs_*> options from
F</proc/cmdline>.  Instead it only takes ordinary command line
options.  The appliance init script turns F</proc/cmdline> into daemon
command line options.

The tests can now run the daemon as a "captive process", allowing it
to be run directly on the host.  The main advantage of this is we can
run valgrind directly on the daemon during testing.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.28.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1239053>

virt-v2v error reporting when grub.conf cannot be parsed by Augeas

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1238053>

v2v:Duplicate disk target set when convert guest with cdrom attached

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1237869>

Virtio drivers are not installed for windows 2008 guests by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1234351>

virt-v2v Support for Fedora virtio-win drivers

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1232192>

Virt-v2v gives an error on a blank disk: part_get_parttype: unknown signature, of the output: BYT;

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229385>

virt-p2v in kernel command line mode should power off the machine after conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229340>

virt-p2v no GUI mode appends \n to the final command line parameter

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229305>

virt-sysprep at cleanup deletes /var/spool/at/.SEQ which results in failing at

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1226794>

"Doing conversion……" still shows after cancel the conversion from virt-p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1215042>

Memory leak in virNetSocketNewConnectUNIX

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1213324>

virt-v2v: warning: unknown guest operating system: windows windows 6.3 when converting win8,win8.1,win2012,win2012R2 to rhev

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1213247>

virt tools should print the same format of version string

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212808>

RFE: virt-builder --touch

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212807>

virt-builder --selinux-relabel flag fails on cross-architecture builds

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212680>

RFE: virt-inspector xpath query should output a neat format of the query element

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212152>

virt-builder firstboot-command fails: File name too long

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1211996>

virt-inspector gives incorrect arch (ppc64) for ppc64le guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1203817>

RFE: virt-customize --move and --copy

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1201526>

index-parser can't parse systemd mount files properly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1196101>

virt-builder --upload option doesn't work to a FAT partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1196100>

virt-builder -x option on its own does not enable tracing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1195204>

`virt-builder` should create $HOME/.cache directory if it already doesn't exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1193237>

Virt-builder fingerprint is required even when no check desired

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1189284>

virt-resize should preserve GPT partition UUIDs, else EFI guests become unbootable

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1188866>

Performance regression in virt-builder when uncompressing image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1186800>

virt-v2v should support gzip format ova as input

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1185561>

virt-sparsify should ignore read-only LVs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1182463>

"mknod-b", "mknod-c", and "mkfifo" do not strip non-permissions bits from "mode"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1176493>

virt-v2v ignores sound device when convert xen guest to local kvm

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175676>

Typo error in 'help ping-daemon'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175196>

"parse-environment" and "parse-environment-list" fail to parse "LIBGUESTFS_TRACE = 0"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175035>

"is-blockdev"/"is-blockdev-opts" fail to detect "/dev/sda"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174280>

RFE: Allow v2v conversion of Oracle Linux 5.8 VMware VM

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174200>

New virt-v2v failure: CURL: Error opening file: NSS: client certificate not found (nickname not specified): Invalid argument

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174123>

Graphics password disappear after conversion of virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174073>

The listen address for vnc is changed after conversion by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1171666>

inspection thinks EFI partition is a separate operating system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1171130>

virt-v2v conversion of RHEL 3 guest fails with: All of your loopback devices are in use

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1170685>

Conversion of RHEL 4 guest fails: rpm -ql 1:kernel-utils-2.4-23.el4: virt-v2v: error: libguestfs error: command_lines:

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1170073>

virt-v2v picks debug kernels over non-debug kernels when versions are equal

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1169045>

virt-sparsify: libguestfs error: qemu-img info: 'virtual-size' is not representable as a 64 bit integer

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1169015>

virt-resize --expand fails on ubuntu-14.04.img image (regression)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1168144>

warning: fstrim: fstrim: /sysroot/: FITRIM ioctl failed: Operation not supported (ignored) when convert win2003 guest from xen server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167921>

p2v: No Network Connection dialog

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167774>

virt-p2v fails with error:"nbd.c:nbd_receive_negotiate():L501: read failed"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167623>

Remove "If reporting bugs, run virt-v2v with debugging enabled .." message when running virt-p2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167601>

"Conversion was successful" pop out even virt-p2v fails

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167302>

virt-v2v: warning: ova hard disk has no parent controller when convert from a ova file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1166618>

virt-resize should give out the detail warning info to let customers know what's going wrong

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165975>

File "/boot/grub2/device.map" showing is not right after converting a rhel7 guest from esx server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165785>

mount-loop command fails: mount failed: Unknown error -1

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165569>

Disable "cancel conversion" button after virt-p2v conversion finished

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165564>

Provide Reboot/Shutdown button after virt-p2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164853>

Booting in qemu found no volume groups and failed checking the filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164732>

The description of 'help append' is not accurately, it add the kernel options to libguestfs appliance not the guest kernel

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164697>

typo errors in man pages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164619>

Inspect-get-icon failed on RHEL7 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1162966>

xfs should also give a warning out to let customer know the limitation

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1161575>

Failed to import guest with "rtl8139" nic  to openstack server after converted by v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159651>

virt-sysprep firstboot script is not deleted if it reboot a RHEL 7 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159258>

esx win2008 32 bit guest fail to load after conversion because the firmware isn't ACPI compatible

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159016>

libvirt backend does not set RBD password

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1158526>

Use password file instead of process interaction

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1157679>

virt-p2v-make-disk should add firmwares

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1156449>

libguestfs FTBFS on f21 ppc64le

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1156301>

virt-inspector support adding a remote disk, but in its man page -a URI / --add URI is missing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1155121>

Virt-v2v will fail when using relative path for -i ova

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1153844>

Redundancy whitespace at the end of directory name when use <TAB> to complete the directory name in guestfish with a xfs filesystem in guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1153589>

virt-v2v will hang when converting esx guest before disk copy phase

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1152998>

virt-v2v / qemu-img fails on ova image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151910>

virt-ls should remove '/' in the output when specify the directory name as /etc/

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151900>

Should also add a field for directory files when run virt-ls with --csv option

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151033>

virt-v2v conversions from VMware vCenter server run slowly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146832>

virt-v2v fail to convert guest with disk type volume

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146007>

Input/output error during conversion of esx guest.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1135585>

[RFE] virt-builder should support copying in a directory/list of files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1089566>

[abrt] livecd-tools: kickstart.py:276:apply:IOError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: '/run/media/jones/2tp001data/createlive/temp/imgcreate-_dX8Us/install_root/etc/rpm/macros.imgcreate'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1079625>

virt-sparsify fails if a btrfs filesystem contains readonly snapshots

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1075164>

RFE: allow passing in a pre-opened libvirt connection from python

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/912499>

Security context on image file gets reset

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/889082>

[RFE] virt-v2v should check whether guest with same name exist on target first then transfer the disk

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/855059>

RFE: virt-p2v: display more information about network devices such as topology, bonding, etc.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823758>

p2v client should have largest number restrictions for CPU and Memory settings

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/709327>

hivex cannot read registry hives from ReactOS

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/709326>

virt-inspector cannot detect ReactOS

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/119673>

installation via NFS doesn't seem to work

=back

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.28

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.26.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 Tools

L<virt-v2v(1)> and L<virt-p2v(1)> are tools for converting from
foreign hypervisors (such as VMware or Xen) or physical machines, to
KVM.  These tools were previously a separate project.  The code for
both tools has been integrated into the libguestfs tree.  As part of
the refactoring, virt-p2v has been rewritten (from Ruby, now C), and
virt-v2v now uses several modern features of qemu which make it run
many times faster than before.  L<virt-v2v(1)> can import from: VMware
vCenter, VMware OVA files, local disk files, libvirt, RHEL 5 Xen.  It
can output to: oVirt or Red Hat Enterprise Virtualization (RHEV-M),
OpenStack Glance, libvirt, qemu, local disk files.

L<virt-log(1)> is a new tool for listing log files from guests.  It
supports a variety of guests including Linux traditional, Linux using
journal, and Windows event log.

L<virt-builder(1)> has a new C<--machine-readable> option to make it
simpler to consume virt-builder from other programs.

New L<virt-builder(1)> and L<virt-customize(1)> I<--chmod> option.

L<virt-sysprep(1)> will now remove: systemd journals, anaconda logs,
lightdm logs, debian-installer files, apt logs, exim logs, ConsoleKit
logs, firewalld logs, grubby logs, proftpd logs, libvirt/libxml logs,
and several other log files.  The virt-sysprep C<user-account>
operation is now able to remove or keep particular user accounts.
(Pino Toscano).

New L<guestmount(1)> I<--fd> option, allowing you to run guestmount
captive under another process.

L<virt-sparsify(1)> has a new I<--tmp> option allowing you to
precisely control where temporary files are stored.

L<virt-sparsify(1)> can now write to a block device.

L<virt-customize(1)> and L<virt-sysprep(1)> now support adding
firstboot scripts to Windows guests.

L<virt-cat(1)>, L<virt-edit(1)>, L<virt-ls(1)> now support the I<-m>
option, allowing you to override automatic inspection of guests and
instead specify where to mount partitions (Pino Toscano).

The virt tools now have coloured output: green for OK, red for errors,
blue for warnings.

=head3 Language bindings

You can build a Python distribution using C<make -C python sdist>

Ruby bindings have switched from C<Test::Unit> to C<MiniTest>.

The Java bindings are now compatible with OpenJDK 8 (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Inspection

Oracle Linux is returned as C<oraclelinux> (Nikos Skalkotos).

Linux guests which do not have F</etc/fstab> can now be handled
(Pino Toscano).

Minix is returned as C<minix> (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Architectures

Aarch64 (64 bit ARM) support has been added.

Inspection and the C<guestfs_file_architecture> call can now recognize
arm (32 bit) and aarch64 guests.

=head2 Security

=over 4

=item CVE-2014-0191 Network usage and entity resolution in XML parsing

Libguestfs previously used unsafe libxml2 APIs for parsing libvirt
XML.  These APIs defaulted to allowing network connections to be made
when certain XML documents were presented.  Using a malformed XML
document it was also possible to exhaust all CPU, memory or file
descriptors on the machine.

Since the libvirt XML comes from a trusted source (the libvirt daemon)
it is not thought that this could have been exploitable.

This was fixed in libguestfs E<ge> 1.27.9 and the fix was backported
to stable versions E<ge> 1.26.2, E<ge> 1.24.9, E<ge> 1.22.10 and E<ge>
1.20.13.  (Thanks: Dan Berrange, Pino Toscano).

=item Shellshock (bash CVE-2014-6271)

This bash bug indirectly affects libguestfs.  For more information
see:
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2014-September/msg00252.html>

=back

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_clear_backend_setting>

=item C<guestfs_get_backend_setting>

=item C<guestfs_set_backend_setting>

Use these APIs to set individual backend settings.

=item C<guestfs_cpio_out>

Convert a directory within the disk image to cpio format.

=item C<guestfs_journal_get_realtime_usec>

Fetch precise journal times, see L<sd_journal_get_realtime_usec(3)>.

=item C<guestfs_lstatns>

=item C<guestfs_lstatnslist>

=item C<guestfs_statns>

Enhanced versions of C<guestfs_lstat>, C<guestfs_lstatlist>,
C<guestfs_stat> which return nanosecond timestamps.

=back

=head2 Build changes

Libguestfs can now be built with qemu 2.x.

Add support for packaging the appliance on Mageia (Joseph Wang,
Thierry Vignaud).

Augeas is now a required dependency.

Flex and bison are now required dependencies.

=head2 Internals

User-Mode Linux (UML) is no longer a supported backend (although still
available).  It will be supported again once someone steps in and
fixes various regressions and brokenness in the UML (Linux) kernel.

You can now connect gdb to qemu by specifying
C<LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND_SETTINGS=gdb>

Serial BIOS (sgabios) is now used by the libvirt backend (on x86 only)
so that we see early BIOS messages.

For the OCaml virt tools, exceptions are now handled and printed by a
common function.

A GCC warning about large stack frames is now enabled by default.
Several places that used large arrays and structures on the stack have
been fixed.

There is now a test for booting the appliance repeatedly.  Useful for
finding kernel leaks.  See: F<tests/qemu/qemu-boot.c>

There is a test for testing the speed of various qemu features such as
virtio-serial uploads and block device writes.  See:
F<tests/qemu/qemu-speed-test.c>

GCC warnings are now enabled for OCaml-C bindings in the OCaml virt
tools.

The code for editing files used by L<virt-edit(1)>, L<guestfish(1)>
C<edit> command, L<virt-customize(1)> I<--edit> option and more is now
shared between all these utilities (thanks Pino Toscano).

The FUSE tests were rewritten in C to ensure finer control over how
system calls are tested.

The F<update-bugs.sh> script has been fixed so it should no longer
create an empty C<BUGS> file if the Bugzilla server is unavailable.

The L<virt-resize(1)> tests now use a stochastic method to ensure much
deeper and broader testing.

When the network is enabled, the appliance now uses DHCP to acquire an
IP address.

If libvirt is being used then the appliance will connect to C<virbr0>
(can be overridden by setting
C<LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND_SETTINGS=network_bridge=E<lt>some_bridgeE<gt>>).
This enables full-featured network connections, with working ICMP,
ping and so on.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.26.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1153515>

empty (but set) LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND prints libguestfs: error: invalid backend:

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151766>

libguestfs-bash-completion package contains file /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/virt-log, but no _virt_log() function in that file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151738>

typo error in man page of virt-edit

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151033>

virt-v2v conversions from VMware vCenter server run slowly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150880>

virt-v2v: warning: display <graphics type='sdl'> was ignored when converting rhel5 guest with sdl graphics

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150867>

'copy-file-to-file /src /dest' create file /dest even if command 'copy-file-to-file /src /dest' failed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150815>

Can not find "RECURSIVE LONG LISTING" in 'man virt-diff'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150701>

virt-v2v does not fstrim data disks and non-mounted filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1150475>

Exporting 2+ disk guest to RHEV, only one disk shows after import

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1148355>

virt-filesystems: incorrect LVM vg name when listing Fedora 21 Alpha Atomic image filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1148072>

Option missing --no-selinux-relabel

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1148012>

RFE: Allow qemu-bridge-helper to be used to implement guestfs_set_network

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146815>

virt-v2v prints warning: /files/etc/fstab/8/spec references unknown device "cdrom"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146275>

regression setting root password with virt-builder/virt-customize

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146017>

virt-v2v -v -x during windows guest conversion will hang at hivex: hivex_open: used block id ……

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1145995>

Improve the error info when converting windows guest with unclean file system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1145916>

virt-v2v fails to convert win7 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1144891>

RFE: stat calls do not return nanosecond timestamps

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1144766>

futimens() is a no-op via guestmount

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1144201>

guestfish can not restore terminal's output colour when exit guestfish, if the terminal's background colour is black then it will make a inconvenient

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1143949>

virt-customize option '--password-crypto' do not work

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1143887>

Warning shows when converting guests to rhev:chown: changing ownership of ‘/tmp/v2v.u48xag/*.ovf’: Invalid argument

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1143883>

warning shows when converting rhel7 guest:virt-v2v:could not update grub2 console: aug_get: no matching node (ignored)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1143866>

virt-v2v fails with error: cannot open Packages index using db5

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1142416>

part-get-name give 'libguestfs: error: part_get_name: parted does not support the machine output (-m)' error message when run 'part-get-name /dev/sda 1'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1142186>

virt-sysprep option '--mount-options' don't work well

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1142158>

Illegal command 'part-get-name /dev/sda1 1' cause libguestfs appliance crashed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1142004>

virt-v2v prints warning:WARNING:/files/boot/grub/device.map references unknown device "xvda"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141723>

virt-v2v: error: disk sda has no defined format shows when converting xen hvm guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141680>

[RFE] virt-v2 should support convert a domain with using domain's UUID instead of domain name

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141631>

[RFE] virt-v2 should support convert a guest to a dir-pool with using pool's uuid

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141157>

virt-sysprep option '--user-accounts' don't work well

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141145>

virt-v2v fails to convert xen pv guests.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1141113>

virt-v2v fails to convert esx guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1140946>

qemu-img shows error message for backing file twice

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1140894>

No error messages output if append '--format qcow2' after '-a guest.img', guest.img is a raw format image file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1140547>

virt-builder option '--format' don't work well

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1140156>

RFE: Export to RHEV data domain

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1140050>

No error shows when multiple conflicting options used with virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1139973>

Improve the error info when converting xen guest with no passwordless SSH access configured

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1139543>

Improve the error info when converting guest with no space left

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1138586>

No error shows when converting running guest with virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1138184>

virt-v2v will fail when converting guests with initramfs-*kdump.img under /boot

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1138182>

xen guest will be kernel panic after converted by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1130189>

Annoying message about permissions of /dev/kvm

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1123007>

libguestfs 'direct' backend should close file descriptors before exec-ing qemu to avoid leaking !O_CLOEXEC fds

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1122557>

virt-sparsify overwrites block devices if used as output files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1113156>

Empty fstab breaks libguestfs inspection

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1111662>

Guestfs.Error("vgchange_uuid_all:   Volume group has active logical volumes")

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1109174>

virt-win-reg manual page is corrupted

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1106548>

root gets an error accessing to a non-root dir on a snapshot guestmount VMDK img

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1103877>

These APIs also need to add to `guestfish -h` command list

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1102448>

mageia package list is incorrect

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1102447>

libguestfs 1.27.13 does not build due to libxml library order

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1100498>

RFE: non-polling mechanism to detect guestmount --no-fork readiness

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1099490>

scrub-file can't handle link file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1099284>

typo errors in man pages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1098718>

RFE: virt-builder aliases

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1096465>

virt-builder "proxy=off" setting doesn't turn off the proxy for downloads

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1094746>

virt-sparsify man failes to mention what happens to snapshots within a qcow2 image (they are discarded)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1092753>

virt-builder: If several repos contain the same os-version images, then they are duplicated in -l output

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1091803>

tar-in-opts execute failed that cause libguestfs appliance crashed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1088424>

virt-resize: libguestfs error: part_set_name: parted: /dev/sdb: Error during translation: Invalid or incomplete multibyte or wide character

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1088262>

virt-builder cannot write to a block device

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1085029>

Ruby tests fail with latest Ruby

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1079210>

virt-sparsify --in-place cannot sparsify as much as it should

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1079182>

virt-df cannot report used disk space of windows guest when updated to 6.5

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1077817>

virt-builder error: "syntax error at line 3: syntax error"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1056290>

virt-sparsify overwrites block devices if used as output files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/812970>

virt-rescue cannot set E<ge>E<lt>rescueE<gt> prompt, on Ubuntu 12.04

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.26

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.24.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 Tools

L<virt-customize(1)> is a new tool for customizing virtual machine
disk images.  It lets you install packages, edit configuration files,
run scripts, set passwords and so on.  L<virt-builder(1)> and
L<virt-sysprep(1)> use virt-customize, and command line options across
all these tools are now identical.

L<virt-diff(1)> is a new tool for showing the differences between the
filesystems of two virtual machines.  It is mainly useful when showing
what files have been changed between snapshots.

L<virt-builder(1)> has been greatly enhanced.  There are many more
ways to customize the virtual machine.  It can pull templates from
multiple repositories.  A parallelized internal xzcat implementation
speeds up template decompression.  Virt-builder uses an optimizing
planner to choose the fastest way to build the VM.  It is now easier
to use virt-builder from other programs.  Internationalization support
has been added to metadata.  More efficient SELinux relabelling of
files.  Can build guests for multiple architectures.  Error messages
have been improved.
(Pino Toscano)

L<virt-sparsify(1)> has a new I<--in-place> option.  This sparsifies
an image in place (without copying it) and is also much faster.
(Lots of help provided by Paolo Bonzini)

L<virt-sysprep(1)> can delete and scrub files under user control.  You
can lock user accounts or set random passwords on accounts.  Can
remove more log files.  Can unsubscribe a guest from Red Hat
Subscription Manager.  New flexible way to enable and disable
operations.
(Wanlong Gao, Pino Toscano)

L<virt-win-reg(1)> allows you to use URIs to specify remote disk
images.

L<virt-format(1)> can now pass the extra space that it recovers back
to the host.

L<guestfish(1)> has additional environment variables to give fine
control over the C<E<gt>E<lt>fsE<gt>> prompt.  Guestfish reads its
(rarely used) configuration file in a different order now so that
local settings override global settings.
(Pino Toscano)

L<virt-make-fs(1)> was rewritten in C, but is unchanged in terms of
functionality and command line usage.

=head3 Language bindings

The OCaml bindings have a new C<Guestfs.Errno> module, used to check
the error number returned by C<Guestfs.last_errno>.

PHP tests now work.
(Pino Toscano)

=head3 Inspection

Inspection can recognize Debian live images.

=head3 Architectures

ARMv7 (32 bit) now supports KVM acceleration.

Aarch64 (ARM 64 bit) is supported, but the appliance part does not
work yet.

PPC64 support has been fixed and enhanced.

=head2 Security

=over 4

=item Denial of service when inspecting disk images with corrupt btrfs volumes

It was possible to crash libguestfs (and programs that use libguestfs
as a library) by presenting a disk image containing a corrupt btrfs
volume.

This was caused by a NULL pointer dereference causing a denial of
service, and is not thought to be exploitable any further.

See commit d70ceb4cbea165c960710576efac5a5716055486 for the fix.  This
fix is included in libguestfs stable branches S<E<ge> 1.26.0>, S<E<ge>
1.24.6> and S<E<ge> 1.22.8>, and also in RHEL S<E<ge> 7.0>.
Earlier versions of libguestfs are not vulnerable.

=item Better generation of random root passwords and random seeds

When generating random root passwords and random seeds, two bugs were
fixed which are possibly security related.  Firstly we no longer read
excessive bytes from F</dev/urandom> (most of which were just thrown
away).  Secondly we changed the code to avoid modulo bias.  These
issues were not thought to be exploitable.
(Both changes suggested by Edwin Török)

=back

=head2 API

GUID parameters are now validated when they are passed to API calls,
whereas previously you could have passed any string.
(Pino Toscano)

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_add_drive_opts>: new C<discard> parameter

The new C<discard> parameter allows fine-grained control over
discard/trim support for a particular disk.  This allows the host file
to become more sparse (or thin-provisioned) when you delete files or
issue the C<guestfs_fstrim> API call.

=item C<guestfs_add_domain>: new parameters: C<cachemode>, C<discard>

These parameters are passed through when adding the domain's disks.

=item C<guestfs_blkdiscard>

Discard all blocks on a guestfs device.  Combined with the C<discard>
parameter above, this makes the host file sparse.

=item C<guestfs_blkdiscardzeroes>

Test if discarded blocks read back as zeroes.

=item C<guestfs_compare_*>

=item C<guestfs_copy_*>

For each struct returned through the API, libguestfs now generates
C<guestfs_compare_*> and C<guestfs_copy_*> functions to allow you to
compare and copy structs.

=item C<guestfs_copy_attributes>

Copy attributes (like permissions, xattrs, ownership) from one
file to another.
(Pino Toscano)

=item C<guestfs_disk_create>

A flexible API for creating empty disk images from scratch.  This
avoids the need to call out to external programs like L<qemu-img(1)>.

=item C<guestfs_get_backend_settings>

=item C<guestfs_set_backend_settings>

Per-backend settings (can also be set via the environment variable
C<LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND_SETTINGS>).  The main use for this is forcing TCG
mode in the qemu-based backends, for example:

 export LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND=direct
 export LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND_SETTINGS=force_tcg

=item C<guestfs_part_get_name>

Get the label or name of a partition (for GPT disk images).

=back

=head2 Build changes

The following extra packages are required to build libguestfs 1.26:

=over 4

=item supermin E<ge> 5

Supermin version 5 is required to build this version of libguestfs.

=item flex, bison

Virt-builder now uses a real parser to parse its metadata file, so
these tools are required.

=item xz

This is now a required build dependency, where previously it was
(in theory) optional.

=back

=head2 Internals

PO message extraction rewritten to be more robust.
(Pino Toscano)

C<podwrapper> gives an error if the I<--insert> or I<--verbatim>
argument pattern is not found.

Libguestfs now passes the qemu I<-enable-fips> option to enable FIPS,
if qemu supports it.

C<./configure --without-qemu> can be used if you don't want to specify
a default hypervisor.

Copy-on-write [COW] overlays, used for example for read-only drives,
are now created through an internal backend API (C<.create_cow_overlay>).

Libvirt backend uses some funky C macros to generate XML.  These are
simpler and safer.

The ChangeLog file format has changed.  It is now just the same as
C<git log>, instead of using a custom format.

Appliance start-up has changed:

=over 4

=item *

The libguestfs appliance now initializes LVM the same way as it is
done on physical machines.

=item *

The libguestfs appliance does not write an empty string to
F</proc/sys/kernel/hotplug> when starting up.

Note that you B<must> configure your kernel to have
C<CONFIG_UEVENT_HELPER_PATH=""> otherwise you will get strange LVM
errors (this applies as much to any Linux machine, not just
libguestfs).
(Peter Rajnoha)

=back

Libguestfs can now be built on arches that have L<ocamlc(1)> but not
L<ocamlopt(1)>.
(Hilko Bengen, Olaf Hering)

You cannot use C<./configure --disable-daemon --enable-appliance>.  It
made no sense anyway.  Now it is expressly forbidden by the configure
script.

The packagelist file uses C<m4> for macro expansion instead of C<cpp>.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.24.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1073906>

java bindings inspect_list_applications2 throws java.lang.ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException:

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1063374>

[RFE] enable subscription manager clean or unregister operation to sysprep

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1060404>

virt-resize does not preserve GPT partition names

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1057504>

mount-local should give a clearer error if root is not mounted

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1056290>

virt-sparsify overwrites block devices if used as output files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1055452>

libguestfs: error: invalid backend: appliance

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1054761>

guestfs_pvs prints "unknown device" if a physical volume is missing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1053847>

Recommended default clock/timer settings

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1046509>

ruby-libguestfs throws "expecting 0 or 1 arguments" on Guestfs::Guestfs.new

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1045450>

Cannot inspect cirros 0.3.1 disk image fully

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1045033>

LIBVIRT_DEFAULT_URI=qemu:///system breaks libguestfs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1044585>

virt-builder network (eg. --install) doesn't work if resolv.conf sets nameserver 127.0.0.1

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1044014>

When SSSD is installed, libvirt configuration requires authentication, but not clear to user

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1039995>

virt-make-fs fails making fat/vfat whole disk: Device partition expected, not making filesystem on entire device '/dev/sda' (use -I to override)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1039540>

virt-sysprep to delete more logfiles

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1033207>

RFE: libguestfs inspection does not recognize Free4NAS live CD

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1028660>

RFE: virt-sysprep/virt-builder should have an option to lock a user account

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1026688>

libguestfs fails examining libvirt guest with ceph drives: rbd: image name must begin with a '/'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1022431>

virt-builder fails if $HOME/.cache doesn't exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1022184>

libguestfs: do not use versioned jar file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1020806>

All libguestfs LVM operations fail on Debian/Ubuntu

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1008417>

Need update helpout of part-set-gpt-type

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/953907>

virt-sysprep does not correctly set the hostname on Debian/Ubuntu

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/923355>

guestfish prints literal "\n" in error messages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/660687>

guestmount: "touch" command fails: touch: setting times of `timestamp': Invalid argument

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/593511>

[RFE] function to get partition name

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/563450>

list-devices returns devices of different types out of order

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.24

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.22.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

User-Mode Linux (UML) can be used as an alternative backend
(ie. instead of KVM).  This improves performance especially
when using libguestfs inside a VM (eg. in the cloud).  UML is
supported as a first-class backend.
See L<guestfs(3)/USER-MODE LINUX BACKEND> for how to use this.

ARM (32 bit) and PPC64 are now fully supported.

=head3 Tools

L<virt-builder(1)> is a new tool for building virtual machine images.
It lets you rapidly and securely create guests and customize them.

New L<virt-sysprep(1)> operations:
Remove files in F</tmp> and F</var/tmp>.
Remove RPM database files.
Change root and user passwords.
More log files are removed.
New operations which are not enabled by default:
Create random UUIDs for filesystems.
Reset firewall rules.
(Wanlong Gao)

L<virt-resize(1)> and virt-sysprep can now use URIs to specify a
remote disk.

Use C<guestfish -N filename=type> to create a named disk image
(instead of the default F<test1.img> etc).

L<virt-sparsify(1)> now tests if there is enough disk space to
complete the operation, instead of possibly running out of space half
way through.

L<virt-format(1)> and L<virt-make-fs(1)>: new I<--label> option for
setting filesystem label.

virt-resize I<--no-sparse> flag can be used to resize on to partitions
and other targets that are not zeroed.

=head3 Language bindings

New bindings for the Go programming language.

=head3 API

Support for the systemd journal.

C<guestfs_add_drive_opts> can now control the qemu caching mode
through a new C<cachemode> parameter.  You can select improved
performance for temporary drives, or safety.

C<guestfs_set_label> now works for XFS and btrfs.

New GUESTFS_EVENT_WARNING event for warning messages.

=head3 Inspection

Better inspection of SUSE guests (Olaf Hering).

Better support for non-standard Windows %systemroot% (Matthew Booth).

Enhanced error reporting for Augeas errors.

=head2 Security

=over 4

=item CVE-2013-2124

L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=968306>

A denial of service was possible when inspecting certain guests.  The
fix has been backported to 1.20 and 1.22 branches.

=item CVE-2013-4419

L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2013-October/msg00031.html>

Fix insecure temporary directory handling for remote guestfish.  The
fix has been backported to 1.20 and 1.22 branches.

=back

=head2 New APIs

 add-drive-scratch: Add a temporary scratch drive
 aug-label
 aug-setm
 journal-open: Systemd journal support
 journal-close
 journal-next
 journal-skip
 journal-get
 journal-get-data-threshold
 journal-set-data-threshold
 remount: Allow rw flag to be adjusted on mounted filesystems
 set-uuid: Set UUID of filesystem

C<is-file>, C<is-dir>, C<is-blockdev>, C<is-chardev>, C<is-fifo>,
C<is-socket> APIs now have an extra C<followsymlinks> flag.

C<add-drive> has a new C<cachemode> parameter.

=head2 Build changes

The following packages are required to build libguestfs 1.24:

=over 4

=item Augeas E<ge> 1.0.0

=back

The following optional packages may be added to enhance functionality
but are not required:

=over 4

=item sd-journal

To read journal files from guests which use that.

=item url_mkcow

For UML backend.

=item curl

=item gpg

=item xz

For virt-builder.

=item golang E<ge> 1.1.1

For Go language bindings.

=back

=head2 Internals

New C<make check-*> rules replace C<make extra-tests>.  See C<make
help> and L<guestfs(3)> for details.

Perl code can now be valgrinded.

Inspection code is now fuzz-tested.

C<make> no longer recurses into the generator directory in every other
directory.  This reduces the overhead of builds considerably.

Additional tests for Augeas, hivex.

Add a launch timeout of 20 minutes waiting for the appliance to start
up.

Add a timeout (4 hours) to all tests so we can catch the case where
qemu or other components hang.

Use kvmclock and C<-cpu host>.  This improves clock stability and
overall performance.

C<./configure --enable-packet-dump> mode is fixed.

C<./configure --enable-valgrind-daemon> mode has been rewritten.  It
is now feasible for developers to keep this flag enabled at all times.

Backends have been refactored to be modular (although they are not
actually loadable modules).

When enabled, the network now uses resolver configuration
(ie. /etc/resolv.conf) from the host.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.22.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1019889>

libguestfs-tools.conf should have a man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1018149>

valgrind errors in btrfs_subvolume_list

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1002032>

mke2fs can't return the correct filesystem type when blockscount is less than 2048 for ext3

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1001876>

Update "rsync-out" helpout for using wildcard

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1001875>

Argument 'excludes' of tar-out does not work

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1000428>

virt-format uses wrong partition type for vfat filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1000121>

'sh' command before mount causes daemon to segfault

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/998513>

guestfish does not work when you mix --remote and --add options

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/998482>

guestfish remote prints "libguestfs: error: waitpid (qemu): No child processes"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/995711>

list-filesystems command fails if there are no block devices

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/994517>

cache=none/O_DIRECT workaround doesn't work for images with backing files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/989356>

cap-get-file will return error if the file has not be set capabilities

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/986877>

RFE: Implement set-uuid command

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/986875>

RFE: Implement set-label for xfs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/985269>

Can't set acl value for a specified user with 'acl-set-file'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/983218>

libguestfs double free when kernel link fails during launch

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/981715>

Make xfs filesystem failed with specified blocksize, gives "unknown option -b" error

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/981683>

"hivex-commit" should fail with a relative path

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/981663>

disk-format "qemu-img info: JSON parse error" when target file does not exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/978302>

mke2fs-J should give a meaningful error when specified type is anything except 'ext{2,3,4}'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/975797>

Specifying virtio interface ('iface' parameter) breaks the direct backend - libguestfs hangs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/975753>

"virt-resize --expand" and "virt-resize --resize" outputs error message for Win2008 32bit OS

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/975412>

inspection: Augeas expressions are broken with augeas >= 0.10

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/974904>

virt-resize --expand fails on Ubuntu Cloud Image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/974489>

Regression: Fedora inspection broken by change from guestfs_exists to guestfs_is_file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/972775>

txz-out command produces a bzip2-compressed file (should be xz-compressed)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/969845>

upload to a directory occasionally hangs instead of failing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/968875>

virt-sysprep should support URL-type arguments

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/624334>

blockdev-setbsz succeeds, but does not affect blockdev-getbsz

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.22

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.20.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 API

Remote access to disks:

=over 4

=item *

Network Block Device (nbd)

=item *

Secure Shell (ssh)

=item *

HTTP and HTTPS

=item *

FTP and FTPS

=item *

iSCSI

=item *

Gluster

=item *

Ceph/rbd
(Mike Kelly)

=item *

Sheepdog

=item *

TFTP

=back

The SYSLINUX and EXTLINUX bootloaders can now be installed in disk
images using the API.

Inspection can now handle filesystems such as btrfs where subvolumes
are separately mountable (Matthew Booth).

"Attach methods" are now known as "backends".  Compatibility with
existing code is preserved.

Filenames can contain ':', as long as newer QEMU is being used.

=head3 Tools

Virt-alignment-scan and virt-df scan multiple guests in parallel.

Guestmount now passes errno accurately back to userspace in almost
all cases.

Guestfish and other tools can now use a URI-like syntax to access
remote disks, eg:

 guestfish -a ssh://example.com/path/to/disk.img

Guestfish and guestmount now allow you to specify the filesystem type
when mounting, which is more secure (Dave Vasilevsky).

Guestfish is now the "guest filesystem shell".

Guestfish allows only C<1> C<true> C<t> C<yes> C<y> C<on> C<0>
C<false> C<f> C<no> C<n> C<off> for boolean values (case insensitive),
and gives an error for all other strings.

New tool C<guestunmount> for unmounting FUSE filesystems safely.

C<guestmount --no-fork> flag prevents guestmount from daemonizing.

Virt-resize now uses sparse copies by default, saving considerable
space for guests which are mostly empty.

Bash tab completion has been rewritten and can now handle most tools,
and correctly tab-complete C<--long> options.  In addition, bash
completion scripts are loaded on demand.

=head3 Language bindings

The Java API now supports events.

The Python object now inherits from the C<object> base class.

Python methods which previously returned lists of tuples can now
be made to return a Python dict.  For backwards compatibility, you
have to enable this by using the constructor option
S<C<guestfs.GuestFS (python_return_dict=True)>>.

The PHP bindings are now tested properly, and have had multiple fixes.

The long-deprecated Perl C<Sys::Guestfs::Lib> library has been
removed.
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2013-April/msg00001.html>

=head3 Examples

New example program showing how to enable debugging and capture
log messages.

=head3 Other

Distributors can add arbitrary extra packages to the appliance by
doing:

 ./configure --with-extra-packages="list of package names"

Distributors can use:

 ./configure --with-supermin-extra-options="..."

to add arbitrary extra options to supermin.

=head2 Security

No security issues were found in this release.

=head2 New APIs

 cp-r
 extlinux
 feature-available
 get-program
 is-whole-device
 part-get-gpt-type
 part-set-gpt-type
 rename
 set-program
 syslinux

C only:

 guestfs_event_to_string

=head2 Internals

The febootstrap tool has now been renamed to "supermin".  Libguestfs
can use either, but now prefers "supermin".
L<http://people.redhat.com/~rjones/supermin/>

libxml2 is required to build libguestfs.

The hivexregedit program (from hivex) is required to build from git.

Internal functions can no longer be used unless the caller defines
C<-DGUESTFS_PRIVATE=1>.

Enable C compiler warnings in Python, Ruby bindings.

Fail early and clearly if libvirt does not support qemu/KVM (eg. if
default libvirt connection is to Xen).

C<make print-subdirs> rule, useful for selectively running tests.

Multiple fixes to allow separated (sourcedir != builddir) builds.

Multiple fixes to Haskell bindings.

C<ln> and C<ln-f> APIs now capture C<errno> correctly.

Language binding tests use (mostly) a standard numbering scheme and
aim to test the same range of features in each language.  Also the
number of launches required has been reduced so these tests should run
much more quickly.

Library code internally uses GCC C<__attribute__((cleanup))> (if
available) to simplify memory allocation.

Internal header files have been reorganized.  See the comments in
F<src/guestfs-internal*.h>

Internal code shared between the library and certain tools is now
located in a static C<libutils> library.

Almost all subdirectories can now use parallel builds, although note
that the top-level directories still build in series.

Use of C<PATH_MAX> and C<NAME_MAX> has been eliminated from the code.

The Java API now requires JVM E<ge> 1.6.

Force use of C<serial-tests> with automake E<ge> 1.12.

Use of sockets in the library protocol layer is abstracted, allowing
other non-POSIX layers to be added in future (see
F<src/conn-socket.c>).

C<qemu-img info --output json> is used if available, for more secure
parsing of the output of this command.

Distros can now use C<make INSTALLDIRS=vendor install> to place Ruby
bindings in vendordir.  This eliminates a non-upstream patch carried
by both Fedora and Debian.

Valgrind log files are now written to F<tmp/valgrind-I<DATE>-I<PID>.log>

C<make clean> cleans the local C<tmp/> directory.

The C API tests have been rewritten using a more flexible generator
language that allows arbitrary C code to be executing during tests.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.20.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/961812>

Segfault in inspect-fs.c in mountable code

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/957772>

tar-out and base64-out quoting error

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/957380>

libguestfs: error: btrfsvol:/dev/sda2/root: root device not found: only call this function with a root device previously returned by guestfs_inspect_os

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/948324>

inspection fails if libosinfo is not installed

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/928995>

file on zero-sized file now produces "empty " instead of "empty"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/921292>

qemu: could not open disk image /tmp/.../snapshot1: Permission denied

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/921040>

"error: external command failed, see earlier error messages" message needs to change

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/920225>

libguestfs should use --output json (if supported) to safely parse the output of qemu-img command

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/916780>

feature request: guestmount --with-cleanup-pipefd

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/914934>

oom-killer kills guestfsd when tar-in a lot of data

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/914931>

FileIn commands cause segfault if appliance dies during the file copy in

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/913145>

Misc leaks in virNetClientProgramCall in libvirt 1.0.2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/912499>

Security context on image file gets reset

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/909836>

libguestfs-test-tool --qemu segfaults

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/909624>

Unexpected non-tail recursion in recv_from_daemon results in stack overflow in very long-running API calls that send progress messages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/908322>

virt-tar fails on non-existent directory names "error in chunked encoding at /home/rjones/d/libguestfs/tools/virt-tar line 272."

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/908321>

virt-cat fails on directory names "/dev/stdout: error in chunked encoding"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/907554>

btrfs causes subsequent ntfs-3g filesystem to fail

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/905341>

"No such file or directory" when execute "hivex-commit"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/903620>

btrfs_subvolume_list broken due to change in subvolume list output

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/895910>

guestmount: rename() incorrectly follows symbolic links

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/895905>

guestmount: link() incorrectly returns ENOENT, when it should be EXDEV

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/895904>

checksums-out fail to compute the checksums of all regular files in directory

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/894545>

libguestfs FTBFS on Fedora 19 because of new ruby

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/890027>

virt-sysprep: Setting hostname, domain name and pretty name on Fedora 18 correctly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/887971>

pvcreate fails if partition contains a swap signature

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/887520>

zero_free_space: open: /sysroot//ujqqq135.rd3: Cannot allocate memory

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/886915>

libguestfs with libvirt attach-method fails with odd error if default hypervisor is Xen

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/847549>

Adding a zero-length virtio-scsi disk causes: qemu-kvm: hw/scsi-bus.c:1568: scsi_req_complete: Assertion `req->status == -1' failed.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/811649>

libguestfs cannot open disk images which are symlinks to files that contain ':' (colon) character

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/664558>

RFE: Allow to set log callback in Ruby bindings

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.20

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.18.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 libvirt and sVirt (SELinux confinement)

You can I<optionally> use libvirt to launch and manage the backend
appliance by:

=over 4

=item *

setting C<LIBGUESTFS_ATTACH_METHOD=libvirt[:URI]>

=item *

using C<./configure --with-default-attach-method=libvirt[:URI]>

=item *

or calling the API method C<guestfs_set_attach_method>

=back

SVirt (SELinux confinement) is used to secure the libguestfs
appliance, if the libvirt backend is selected.

=head3 virtio-scsi, larger number of drives, hotplugging

Virtio-scsi is now used by default, if it is available.  This greatly
increases the number of drives that can be added to a single
libguestfs handle (up to 255).

You can now hotplug drives (add and remove drives after launch).

Libguestfs can now handle E<gt> 25 disks, in all APIs, tools and tests.

You can label drives when adding them, then refer to them by label
(F</dev/disk/guestfs/LABEL>) instead of having to use device names
(F</dev/sda>).

=head3 new library features

POSIX Access Control Lists (ACLs) and Linux filesystem capabilities
can now be read and written through the API.

Windows Dynamic Disks are now supported.  The metadata can only be
read (volumes cannot be modified or created).  However the
data/filesystems in the volumes themselves can be mounted, read and
written (Matthew Booth).

Hivex (Windows Registry editing) is now directly supported through the
API, making reading or editing the Windows Registry much more
efficient.

Several libguestfs APIs were reimplemented so they no longer have any
limits on output.  The reimplemented APIs are: C<guestfs_cat>,
C<guestfs_find>, C<guestfs_read_file>, C<guestfs_read_lines>,
C<guestfs_write>, C<guestfs_write_append>, C<guestfs_lstatlist>,
C<guestfs_lxattrlist>, C<guestfs_readlinklist>, C<guestfs_ls>.

=head3 virt tools

C<guestfish touch 'win:c:\new_file'> now works as expected.

C<guestfish> has a new I<--network> option, which enables the user
network in libguestfs.

You can set C<GUESTFISH_PS1> to use fancy prompts in C<guestfish>.

C<rsync>, C<ssh>, C<less> and C<lrzip> commands are now available in
virt-rescue.  In addition, C<rsync> can be used through the API for
doing incremental copies.

C<virt-sparsify> uses qcow2 v3 for increased efficiency.

C<virt-sysprep> enhancements:

=over 4

=item *

generate new UUIDs for PVs and VGs

=item *

remove the local machine ID (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

remove ABRT data (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

remove puppet keys and log files (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

remove process accounting files (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

new I<--firstboot> parameter allowing firstboot scripts
for customizing guests

=item *

remove HOSTNAME field from C<ifcfg-eth*> files (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

miscellaneous improvements for SuSE (Olaf Hering)

=item *

remove man pages cache (Wanlong Gao)

=item *

remove crash data generated by kexec-tools (Wanlong Gao)

=back

C<virt-make-fs> can now create virtual floppy disks (VFDs).

C<guestmount> has a I<--pid-file> option, which can be used to avoid a
race condition between unmounting the filesystem and using the
underlying disk image.

=head3 language bindings

Full-featured Lua bindings have been added in this release
(thanks to Jerome Vuarand for many suggestions).

In Ruby, optional arguments hash is optional.

In Python, optional arguments now don't use special "sentinel"
values, so any integer can be passed as an optional argument.

Erlang bindings now come with examples and tests.

Erlang bindings now handle 64 bit integer parameters correctly.

The automated 'bindtests' now test for 64 bit cleanliness in parameter
passing.  Several bugs in the bindings were found and fixed as a
result.

Better handling of blocking and non-blocking functions should make
libguestfs calls more efficient.

=head3 inspection

Windows guests with unlimited-sized Registries are now supported.
By adding the hivex API to the libguestfs API, it is much more
efficient and easier to inspect and modify the Windows Registry
in guests.

Better support for SuSE guests (Olaf Hering).

Return the architecture of installed applications (John Eckersberg).

Windows 8 is now supported.

Fedora 18 is now supported.

Inspection of ISOs/CDs/DVDs can now use the libosinfo database.

=head3 ports

Libguestfs without the appliance can be compiled on Mac OS X
(Masami HIRATA).

RHEL 5 is now explicitly supported through the 'oldlinux' branch
in upstream git.

PowerPC 64 bit is now supported.  Also libguestfs has been
examined for endianness bugs and these have been fixed.

=head3 daemon

A man page for the daemon (L<guestfsd(8)>) is included.

=head2 Security

=head3 guestfish history file

The F<$HOME/.guestfish> history file is now created with 0600
permissions (instead of 0644 before) so it is no longer world
readable.

=head3 CVE-2012-2690

Old versions of both C<virt-edit> and the C<guestfish> C<edit> command
created a new file containing the changes but did not set the
permissions, etc of the new file to match the old one.  The result
of this was that if you edited a security sensitive file such as
F</etc/shadow> then it would be left world-readable after the edit.

This issue was assigned CVE-2012-2690, and is fixed in libguestfs E<ge> 1.16.

For further information, see
L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=788642>

=head2 New APIs

 acl-delete-def-file
 acl-get-file
 acl-set-file
 canonical-device-name
 cap-get-file
 cap-set-file
 create-flags
 device-index
 disk-has-backing-file
 disk-format
 disk-virtual-size
 filesystem-available
 fill-dir
 fstrim
 get-cachedir
 get-libvirt-requested-credentials
 get-libvirt-requested-credential-prompt
 get-libvirt-requested-credential-challenge
 get-libvirt-requested-credential-defresult
 get-tmpdir
 hivex-close
 hivex-commit
 hivex-node-add-child
 hivex-node-children
 hivex-node-delete-child
 hivex-node-get-child
 hivex-node-get-value
 hivex-node-name
 hivex-node-parent
 hivex-node-set-value
 hivex-node-values
 hivex-open
 hivex-root
 hivex-value-key
 hivex-value-type
 hivex-value-utf8
 hivex-value-value
 inspect-list-applications2 (John Eckersberg)
 list-ldm-volumes
 list-ldm-partitions
 ldmtool-create-all
 ldmtool-diskgroup-disks
 ldmtool-diskgroup-name
 ldmtool-diskgroup-volumes
 ldmtool-remove-all
 ldmtool-scan
 ldmtool-scan-devices
 ldmtool-volume-hint
 ldmtool-volume-partitions
 ldmtool-volume-type
 ls0
 max-disks
 mke2fs (Wanlong Gao)
 mklost-and-found
 mkswap [added label and uuid optional arguments]
 mktemp (Wanlong Gao)
 nr-devices
 parse-environment
 parse-environment-list
 rm-f
 rsync
 rsync-in
 rsync-out
 set-cachedir
 set-libvirt-supported-credentials
 set-libvirt-requested-credential
 set-tmpdir
 shutdown [backported to 1.16 and 1.18]
 tar-in [added compress flag]
 tar-out [added compress, numericowner, excludes flags]
 umount [added force and lazy optional arguments]
 utsname
 xfs-admin (Wanlong Gao)
 xfs-growfs (Wanlong Gao)
 xfs-info (Wanlong Gao)
 xfs-repair (Wanlong Gao)

In the C API only:

 guestfs_push_error_handler
 guestfs_pop_error_handler

=head2 Internals

qemu E<ge> 1.1 is required (E<ge> 1.2 preferred).

febootstrap E<ge> 3.20 is required.

libvirt is optional, but if you want to use the new libvirt
backend for launching the appliance then libvirt E<ge> 0.10.2 would
be required.

Coverity has been run over the complete codebase, and many
issues fixed (thanks Ondrej Vasik, Kamil Dudka).

Functions which previously had no optargs can now be converted to ones
with optargs, making extending the API much more flexible.  Source and
binary backwards compatibility is preserved for users of the API.

The way that libguestfs APIs and structures are represented in the
generator has changed to use an OCaml struct instead of a tuple.  This
makes generator descriptions more flexible and easier to understand.
For details see commits 39d1a7db and eb185eef.

Separation of the library code into more files:

=over 4

=item *

Launch backends are now located in separate files
eg. F<src/launch-appliance.c>, C<src/launch-libvirt.c>.

=item *

Generated action code is now split over several F<src/action*.c>
files, for faster compilation.

=item *

The huge F<src/guestfs.c> file is now split into smaller logical
units.

=back

POD (documentation) is now generated using a rewritten Perl
program instead of pod2* + shell scripts.

Man pages now contain stable dates (Hilko Bengen).

Skipped tests now exit with code 77, so they appear as
C<SKIP:> in C<make check> output.

The parallel mount-local test has been rewritten in C (RHBZ#838081).

Ruby 1.8.5 is now supported (though Ruby E<ge> 1.9 is preferred).

Perl bindings can be disabled via C<./configure --disable-perl>
(Wulf C. Krueger).  Note that Perl is still required in order to build
libguestfs.

Java bindings are now enabled/disabled using C<./configure --with-java>
or C<./configure --without-java> (Wulf C. Krueger).

New configure options C<./configure --enable-code-profiling> and
C<./configure --enable-code-coverage>.

Multiple fixes to use of 64 bit integers in language bindings.

The appliance backend now uses sgabios instead of vgabios
(Dan Berrange).

The C<./run> script now sets enough environment variables that you
can run OCaml, Python, Ruby, Java, GJS, Erlang, Lua programs.

C<./run --test> flag for running tests with minimal output.  It also
prints the time taken to run each test.

The C<./run> script now builds up paths cumulatively, meaning that you
can use C<./run> twice, or use the libguestfs and libvirt C<./run>
scripts together.

You can extract a list of external commands required by the
daemon, making building the appliance on certain distros easier
(Olaf Hering).

The C<virt-rescue> command is now tested during C<make check>.

The generator now removes unused generated files.  This helps
when going back and forth with git rebase, git bisect, etc.

Tests now run in a separate toplevel C<tmp/> directory in the source.
This allows the directory to be labelled for SELinux (sVirt), and also
makes it easier to clean up.

C<make syntax-check> now works to a greater extent, and many problems
in the main code that were found by syntax-check have been fixed
(thanks Jim Meyering).

Emacs mode (-*- foo -*-) has been added to generated files.

Progress bar output is now sent to F</dev/tty> so it doesn't end up in
the regular output of the program.  virt-resize and virt-sparsify now
suppress progress bars if stdout is not a tty.

There is now a C<./configure --without-libvirt> option.  This is
useful for testing that the code still compiles without libvirt.

There is now an internal mini-library for running commands.  This
allows us to redirect errors from external commands into events.

Code for handling temporary directories and the appliance cache was
completely overhauled.

Code for temporarily ignoring/disabling errors now looks like this:

 guestfs_push_error_handler (g, NULL, NULL);
 guestfs_mkdir (g, "/foo"); /* We don't care if this fails. */
 guestfs_pop_error_handler (g);

The C<tests/extra> directory has gone.  The "extra tests" are now
split into separately runnable targets, such as C<make check-valgrind>.
Use C<make help> to get a summary of the targets.

The C<lpj> option is passed to the appliance kernel when using TCG.
This should improve clock stability (thanks Marcelo Tosatti,
Olaf Hering).

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.18.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/882417>

libguestfs tools fail with odd error messages if TMPDIR is not an absolute path

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/882299>

Windows 8 guest disks can't be mounted: "The NTFS partition is in an unsafe state. Please resume and shutdown Windows fully (no hibernation or fast restarting), or mount the volume read-only with the 'ro' mount option."

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/881953>

libguestfs: migration to /etc/hostname, /etc/vconsole.conf, /etc/locale.conf

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/880801>

virt-df with two -a options displays incorrect disk image name

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/879416>

libguestfs-test-tool pauses when you use --help option

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/876579>

mke2fs API does not apply block device naming translation to journaldevice optarg

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/860235>

SELinux policy ought to allow qemu to write to unconfined_u:object_r:user_tmp_t:s0

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/859949>

RFE: inspect-list-applications does not return the architecture of RPM packages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/859885>

inspect-list-applications does not list all installed RPM packages with same name and different versions

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/859876>

guestfish printed paths are not canonicalized

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/859875>

Progress bar output should go to tty(?) stderr(?)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/858696>

virt-sysprep reports Guestfs.Error("read_lines: fopen: /etc/sysconfig/network: No such file or directory") on some Fedora guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/858128>

libguestfs fail to list devices added by add-drive-ro-with-if twice

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/858126>

virt-inspector fail to work with some windows guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/853762>

virt-sparsify should use a more robust method to detect the input format

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/853393>

libvirt doesn't label console, serial sockets

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/853159>

virt-rescue in Fedora 18 is completely broken

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/852394>

libguestfs inspection limits registries to 100 MiB

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/852194>

virt-sparsify --compress fails if output is raw format

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/847881>

RFE: allow extra arguments (like --exclude) to tar-out

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/847880>

tar-out should allow (or force) --numeric-owner

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/845522>

guestfish "copy-out / localdir" command fails with "No such file or directory"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/845488>

Long filenames on NTFS cause tar-out, copy-out etc to fail with error "Cannot open: File name too long"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/842307>

RFE: Need help designing and implementing selinux policy for libguestfs/sVirt

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/840572>

virt-make-fs / tar-in should support vfat properly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/840115>

guestfish touch problem - case_sensitive_path API expects the file to exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/836710>

Data loss when writing to qcow2-format disk files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/834712>

lvresize, lvresize-free fail unnecessarily if you don't change the size of the LV: "New size (nn extents) matches existing size (nn extents)"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/824716>

compress-device-out didn't support bzip2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/824043>

guestfish unrecognized mount option gives confusing error message

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823887>

Filenames containing Chinese characters can't be created on vfat filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823885>

virt-make-fs cannot create vfat filesystem containing filesystems with Chinese characters

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823883>

virt-make-fs -t fat fails with an obscure error message

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823821>

Inspection fails when /etc/HOSTNAME is empty

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/801117>

libguestfs cannot get icon for Windows 8

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/798979>

Ubuntu install CDs from oneiric onwards are not recognized: "multi-boot operating systems are not supported"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/782167>

libguestfs doesn't recognize Windows Dynamic disks in some configurations, eg. spanned

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/713678>

Not all febootstrap messages are redirected to log callbacks

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/627675>

libguestfs inspector code cannot handle /dev/disk/by-id/* paths

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/602997>

part-get-bootable gives wrong result with an unordered part layout

=back

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.18

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.16.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 virt tools

   - virt-sysprep has been rewritten and expanded (thanks Wanlong Gao)
     http://libguestfs.org/virt-sysprep.1.html

   - virt-sparsify --zero is a new option that zeroes the named
     partition or filesystem

   - virt-sparsify can now safely sparsify Linux swap partitions

   - virt-sparsify fixed so it cleans up after ^C
     http://libguestfs.org/virt-sparsify.1.html

   - a new tool 'libguestfs-make-fixed-appliance' is provided to build
     fixed appliances that can be copied to other machines that don't
     have febootstrap support
     http://libguestfs.org/libguestfs-make-fixed-appliance.1.html

   - virt-filesystems now displays the parents (containers) of MD
     devices and volume groups

   - virt-alignment-scan, run with no args, displays alignment information
     for all libvirt domains

   - virt-df and virt-alignment-scan will display information from all
     guests even when a disk is inaccessible

   - virt-rescue new --scratch option to make scratch disks
     https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2012/04/26/virt-rescue-scratch/#content

   - virt-make-fs can now be used to create btrfs

   - virt-edit preserves permissions, UID, GID and SELinux context
     when editing files

   - guestfish passes the close event over stdout and remote correctly

   - guestfish new '--pipe-error' option lets you detect errors in pipe
     commands

   - guestfish globs now expand device names

   - comma and colon characters in filenames now handled correctly by
     all virt tools

=head3 inspection

   - added support for Fedora 17+

   - added support for FreeDOS

   - added support for Buildroot and Cirros

   - inspection is now compatible with Windows guests that have been
     sysprepped (thanks Grant Williamson).

=head3 API

   - broad support for btrfs added, including adding multiple devices,
     fsck, snapshots (thanks Wanlong Gao)

   - the new 'mount-local' API brings FUSE support directly into the
     core libguestfs API
     https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2012/05/14/tip-using-mount-local-api-from-c/#content

   - new man page: guestfs-performance(1), which contains performance
     tuning tips
     http://libguestfs.org/guestfs-performance.1.html

   - new man page: guestfs-faq(1), Frequently Asked Questions
     http://libguestfs.org/guestfs-faq.1.html

   - ENOTSUP (from guestfs_last_errno) is now returned for APIs that
     are not supported

=head3 examples

   - 'copy_over' example showing how to copy between two handles

   - 'display_icon' program displays the icon associated with a guest

   - 'mount_local.c' example shows how to use the mount-local API

=head2 Security

  (no security problems were found or fixed in this release)

=head2 New APIs

  btrfs-device-add: Add devices to a btrfs filesystem.
  btrfs-device-delete: Remove devices from a btrfs filesystem.
  btrfs-filesystem-sync: Sync a btrfs filesystem.
  btrfs-filesystem-balance: Balance a btrfs filesystem.
  btrfs-fsck: Check btrfs filesystem.
  btrfs-set-seeding: Enable or disable seeding.
  btrfs-subvolume-create: Create a btrfs snapshot.
  btrfs-subvolume-delete: Delete a btrfs snapshot.
  btrfs-subvolume-list: List btrfs snapshots and subvolumes.
  btrfs-subvolume-set-default: Set default btrfs subvolume.
  btrfs-subvolume-snapshot: Create a writable btrfs snapshot.
  get-e2attrs: List ext2 file attributes of a file.
  get-e2generation: Get ext2 file generation of a file.
  isoinfo, isoinfo-device: Get information from the header of ISO files.
  llz: List files with SELinux information.
  lvcreate-free: Create an LVM logical volume in % remaining free space.
  md-stat: Return underlying devices from an MD device.
  mkfs-brtfs: Make btrfs filesystem, with all tunables.
  mount-local, mount-local-run, umount-local: FUSE support in the API.
  ntfsclone-in, ntfsclone-out: Save, restore NTFS from backup.
  ntfsfix: Fix common errors and force Windows to check NTFS.
  set-e2attrs: Set or clear ext2 file attributes of a file.
  set-e2generation: Set ext2 file generation of a file.
  set-label: Unified interface for setting filesystem label.
  vgmeta: Get volume group metadata.
  wipefs: Wipe filesystem signatures from a device.
  zero-free-space: Zero free space in a filesystem.

=head2 Internals

 - The debian/ subdirectory has been removed.  We recommend you use
   the official Debian packages made by Hilko Bengen.
   http://people.debian.org/~bengen/libguestfs/
   http://packages.debian.org/search?keywords=libguestfs

 - O_CLOEXEC / SOCK_CLOEXEC is now used for almost all file
   descriptors that the library opens.

 - posix_fadvise is called when sequentially reading or writing large
   files.

 - close all file descriptors and remove all signal handlers in the
   recovery process

 - multiple gcc warnings and Coverity bugs have been fixed;  many
   strict-overflow bugs have also been fixed

 - use ./configure --enable-valgrind-daemon to use valgrind on the
   daemon;  many errors have been fixed

 - use ./configure --with-qemu-options to pass extra options to qemu

 - the daemon now has a growable strings buffer type (DECLARE_STRINGSBUF)

 - the <guestfs.h> header file works with C++ and we have a regression
   test for this

 - multiple APIs which should only be called in the CONFIG state now
   give an error if they are not

 - .gitignore fixed to use absolute paths

 - gobject bindings have been expanded, including mapping libguestfs
   events to gobject signals (thanks Matt Booth)

 - gobject documentation is generated properly (thanks Matt Booth)

 - gobject header files now live in a subdirectory

 - CompareWithString test in the generator now works

 - FUInt32, FUInt64 struct field types now use the correct XDR type

 - OCaml tests are now run on bytecode and native code.

 - java -Xlint:all is used, and all warnings have been fixed

 - bmptopng, wrestool (etc) missing or failure no longer prints
   warning messages

 - ruby: Use RbConfig instead of Config.

 - PYTHONPATH is set by the ./run script.

 - appliance building is now thread-safe.

 - appliance now uses 'ip' instead of 'ifconfig' and 'netstat'
   commands

 - several fixes to make parallel builds work properly

 - guestfish --listen now cleans up properly

 - the BUSY state has been removed

 - gettextize has been removed, replaced by a simple Makefile.am

 - gettext support now covers virt-resize, virt-sparsify and virt-sysprep

 - better support for the arm architecture

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 822490 virt-ls error: "libguestfs: error: checksum: path: parameter cannot be NULL"
 - 816839 data overflow error when debug progress -1
 - 816098 virt-make-fs fails to make a btrfs filesystem because it doesn't allocate enough space
 - 811872 inspection fails on ubuntu 10.04 guest with encrypted swap
 - 811650 guestfs_last_error not set when qemu fails early during launch
 - 811649 libguestfs cannot open disk images which are symlinks to files that contain ':' (colon) character
 - 811117 [RFE][virt-sysprep] net-hwaddr not removed from "ifcfg-*" files on rhel
 - 811112 [RFE][virt-sysprep] hostname can not be changed on rhel system
 - 809361 inspection doesn't recognize Fedora 18 (grub2 + GPT)
 - 807905 mkfs blocksize option breaks when creating btrfs
 - 805070 virt-filesystems should show 'parents' of LV and RAID devices
 - 804464 libguestfs cannot be built when LINGUAS is different then ja or uk
 - 803664 libguestfs inspection fails on Windows XP: libguestfs: error: hivex: could not locate HKLM\SYSTEM\MountedDevices
 - 803533 guestfish: write error
 - 802389 event handlers for 'close' event doesn't work in remote mode
 - 802109 libguestfs uses putc on stderr, results in many individual 1 byte writes of debug messages
 - 801640 [RFE] the error reported by resize2fs-M need to be more clear
 - 801298 Possible null dereference and resource leaks
 - 801273 Document for set-pgroup need to be updated
 - 798196 virt-resize confuses format and output_format variables; using --output-format sets the input format
 - 797986 virt-resize on Windows XP in sysprep state causes "UNMOUNTABLE_BOOT_VOLUME" BSOD
 - 796520 [RFE] Prevent user from running some appliance configure commands after appliance boot up
 - 790721 multiprovider build error: RuntimeError: link: /tmp/.guestfs-0/kernel /tmp/.guestfs-0/kernel.10139: File exists
 - 789960 guestfsd crash when try to mount non-exist disk
 - 789504 virt-df (other tools?) should not give up if a guest disk is missing
 - 788641 virt-edit doesn't preserve file permissions
 - 786215 libguestfs inspection does not recognize FreeDOS operating system
 - 786188 libguestfs inspection does not recognize FreeDOS install CD
 - 785668 aug-defnode: daemon crash
 - 784647 Libguestfs uses deprecated net-tools
 - 769304 virt-resize on RHEL 6 kernel fails to re-read the partition table
 - 755729 Error message for resize2fs-M needs tweaking
 - 701814 virt-win-reg fails on a libvirt guest that has no defined disk format: "format parameter is empty or contains disallowed characters"
 - 679737 libguestfs: improve error message when zerofree is not available in the appliance
 - 635971 glob mkfs ext2 /dev/vd[b-t]1 does not expand

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.16

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.14.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 libguestfs

   - allow XFS filesystems to be created over an existing filesystem
     (Wanlong Gao)

   - the (unspecified) default alignment for part-disk has been
     changed to 64K for better support of high-end network-attached
     storage

   - new guestfs-testing(1) man page

   - list-filesystems returns MD devices containing filesystems
     (Matthew Booth)

   - support for GCC >= 4.7 (Jim Meyering)

   - check user does not add the same drive twice (Wanlong Gao).

=head3 language bindings

   - Experimental GObject bindings, with support for GObject
     Introspection.  You can now use libguestfs from Javascript.
     Please note these are not stable and final in this release.
     (Matthew Booth).

   - support for Ruby >= 1.9

   - Ruby bindings can be disabled individually (Hilko Bengen)

   - support for Python 2.6, 3.x (Richard Jones, Hilko Bengen)

   - support for PHP >= 5.4

   - new %guestfs_introspection hash is available in Perl bindings so
     you can query which optional arguments are available

=head3 inspection

   - guests with MD devices can be inspected (Matthew Booth)

   - support for GNU/Hurd guests

=head3 guestfish

   - libguestfs events (such as progress bar events and log messages) can
     be trapped and processed by user-defined shell scripts.

   - MD devices are tab-completed (Matthew Booth)

=head3 virt tools

   - New tool virt-format for erasing and making blank disks

   - virt-sparsify new --compress and -o options to allow for compressed
     and different format output

   - virt-sparsify can now detect and sparsify .vdi files

   - virt-sysprep no longer requires xmlstarlet; a new virt-inspector --xpath
     option has been added to replace this functionality

   - virt-rescue has a new --suggest option which suggests mount commands
     for the guest

   - virt-resize no longer requires OCaml pcre library

=head3 libguestfs live

   - daemon will no longer try to edit your live /etc/lvm configuration

   - fix a potential security problem with predictable /tmp names (Steve Kemp)

=head2 Security

  CVE-2011-4127, RHBZ#757071
  Mitigate possible privilege escalation via SG_IO ioctl
  For more information, see: https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/commit/9a5f784d511a8f00a8386f316eab41fe660430db

=head2 New APIs

  blkid: print all attributes of a device known to blkid (Wanlong Gao)
  e2fsck: access to more features of e2fsck (Wanlong Gao)
  list-md-devices: list of Linux MD devices (Matthew Booth)
  md-create: create an MD device
  md-detail: returns metadata for an MD device (Matthew Booth)
  md-stop: stop an MD device (Wanlong Gao)
  tune2fs: allow ext2/3/4 filesystems to be tuned

=head2 Internals

  Git hosting has moved to http://github.com/libguestfs

  The various test directories have been rearranged logically, and now
  all appear under 'tests/'.

  There is a 'make extra-tests' rule which runs ordinary tests and
  additional tests, using valgrind to check for memory problems.

  Multiple memory leaks and other problems found by valgrind and fixed.

  Support for optional arguments in the generator has been rewritten
  to provide more features and safety (Matthew Booth).

  With gcc -fvisibility=hidden is used for internal symbols, avoiding
  call indirection via the PLT.

  RHashtable functions can be tested in the generator.

  ADD_ARG macro in daemon allows arg lists to be constructed without
  risk of stack smashing.

  Fix generation of OCaml functions that have more than 10 arguments.

  psmisc has been added to the appliance, allowing use of 'fuser',
  'killall' and 'pstree' for debugging.

  bindtests now cover RBufferOut and optional arguments (Matthew Booth).

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 769680 temporary directories created during appliance builds are not cleaned up on error
 - 761460 guestfs_utimens hangs on named pipes
 - 761451 guestfs_utimens cannot set times on a directory
 - 760775 "guestfish: multi-boot operating systems are not supported by the -i option" should be more explanatory
 - 760669 guestfish copy-in and <! (inline execution) don't mix well: pclose: No child processes
 - 760000 libguestfs fails to compile with Ruby >= 1.9
 - 755729 Error message for resize2fs-M needs tweaking
 - 750889 Python code incompatible with Python v3.
 - 596761 Ctrl-\ causes guestfish to abort

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.14

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.12.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

  Erlang bindings.

  virt-alignment-scan is a new tool to check the alignment of
  partitions within virtual machines or disk images.

  virt-sparsify is a new tool to make virtual machine disk images
  sparse.

  virt-sysprep is a new tool to make cloning guests from a template
  simpler.

=head3 guestfish

   - New commands setenv, unsetenv, to set environment variables.

   - The input file and line number is printed in error messages.

   - guestfish progress bars are now a "mini-library" used by other
     tools too.

=head3 guestmount

   - the --live option (for access to live VMs) now works.

=head3 virt-cat

   - virt-cat can now handle Windows paths and drive letters (RHBZ#693359).

=head3 virt-filesystems

   - the MBR partition type byte is displayed in --long output.

=head3 virt-make-fs

   - virt-make-fs now sets the MBR partition type byte correctly,
     improving compatibility with Windows (RHBZ#746295).

=head3 virt-resize

   - virt-resize can now work with guests using extended and logical
     partitions, in particular Ubuntu guests.

   - virt-resize can now align the first partition of Windows guests,
     improving performance.  The new virt-resize --align-first option
     controls this behaviour.

   - The virt-resize --machine-readable flag makes it possible to use
     virt-resize from other programs.

   - Partitions are now aligned to 128 sectors (usually 64K) by
     default.  This improves efficiency on high-end storage.  The new
     virt-resize --alignment option allows the alignment to be
     adjusted.

=head3 virt-win-reg

   - The syntax for deleting registry keys and values is documented
     in the man page (RHBZ#737944).

=head3 library

   - non-printing characters are escaped correctly in debug output.

   - GUESTFS_EVENT_ENTER is a new event type generated whenever a
     libguestfs function is called.

   - the library contains systemtap/DTrace probes.

   - the library can now be compiled without hivex (RHBZ#723474).

=head3 inspection

   - Improve detection of Windows disks.

   - Adds support for:
         ttylinux - a minimal Linux
         Mageia (thanks Michael Scherer)
         OpenSUSE and zypper (thanks Michael Scherer, Vincent Untz)
         Ubuntu logos (thanks Michael Scherer)
         NetBSD and pkgsrc (thanks Michael Scherer)

   - Handle some guest types that use /dev/root in /etc/fstab.

   - Fix handling of guests with > 26 disks (thanks Matthew Booth)

   - Add support for guests with HP Smart Array disks (thanks Matthew Booth)

=head3 febootstrap

   - FEBOOTSTRAP_KERNEL, FEBOOTSTRAP_MODULES environment variables can
     be set in order to choose which kernel to use for the appliance.

=head3 misc

   - ArchLinux support now working with Linux 3.0 (thanks Erik Nolte)

   - libvirt disks marked <readonly/> are now added readonly when
     using the virt-tools '-d' option.

=head2 Security

  (no security problems were found or fixed in this release)

=head2 New APIs

  compress-out, compress-device-out, copy-device-to-device,
  copy-device-to-file, copy-file-to-device, copy-file-to-file,
  get-smp, part-to-partnum, set-smp.

  The mount API no longer implicitly adds -o sync,noatime options.

  add-domain has a new 'readonlydisk' optional parameter to control
  how <readonly/> disks are handled.

=head2 Internals

 - Coverity was run on the source and more bugs were identified and
   fixed.

 - PCRE library is now required to build libguestfs.

 - APIC is now the default for the appliance.  You can also enable
   SMP support in the appliance.

 - OCaml bindings now correctly acquire GC lock during callbacks.

 - Out of tree builds should now work correctly (thanks Hilko Bengen).

 - ./configure --with-extra="..." can be used by packagers to set
   the extra version string.

 - zero, zero-device APIs: if the blocks already contain zeroes,
   don't write zeroes, so that we don't unnecessarily make the
   underlying storage non-sparse.

 - is-zero, is-zero-device APIs: optimize these so zero detection is
   faster.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 748266 libguestfs should detect versions of qemu which require -machine pc option
 - 747290 libguestfs ignores <readonly/> in libvirt XML
 - 747287 Misleading error message when permission denied opening a disk image
 - 746295 virt-make-fs doesn't set partition ID
 - 744795 guestmount --live is not usable
 - 737944 virt-win-reg hyphen (delete key) syntax may be wrong, and is not documented
 - 733297 ruby event handlers fail with "exception in callback: wrong argument type Proc (expected Data)"
 - 731744 libguestfs should escape special/non-printing characters in debug output
 - 729887 appliance crashes running aug_init with flags=4
 - 729075 libguestfs confuses Hp_recovery partition with Windows root filesystem
 - 727178 error: luks_open: cryptsetup: error while loading shared libraries: libfipscheck.so.1: cannot open shared object file: No such file or directory
 - 726739 libguestfs: error: aug_get: no matching node, trying to find hostname
 - 723474 If hivex and/or pcre not installed, libguestfs fails to compile
 - 693359 virt-cat and virt-edit don't handle case sensitive NTFS paths properly
 - 678231 virt-inspector reports unknown filesystem UUID
 - 671082 libguestfs does not work with kernel-rt
 - 666578 libguestfs: unknown filesystem label SWAP-sda2
 - 642821 virt-resize falls over on a disk image with a logical swap partition

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.12

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.10.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 guestfish

   - guestfish strings can use escapes,
     eg. ><fs> write /foo "line 1\nline 2\n"

   - guestfish write-append command can be used to append to files.

   - Long-running file uploads and downloads can be cancelled through the
     API or by hitting ^C in guestfish.

   - New guestfish "display" command for displaying graphical files
     inside guests.

   - In guestfish, tab completion now works on /dev/mapper devices.

=head3 virt-inspector

   - Inspection API can get an icon or logo for certain guests.

   - virt-inspector includes the logo and hostname for certain guests.

   - virt-inspector can now get the version and release numbers for RPM
     packages.

   - CentOS and Scientific Linux are now treated as separate distros by
     the inspection API.

=head3 virt-resize

   - virt-resize can now handle btrfs.

   - New virt-resize --ntfsresize-force option allows Windows VMs to be
     resized multiple times.

=head3 other virt tools

   - guestfish, guestmount, virt-cat, virt-df, virt-edit, virt-filesystems,
     virt-inspector, virt-ls and virt-rescue now allow you to use
     "-d UUID" option to specify a guest by UUID.  This makes them more
     robust to use from other programs.

   - virt-ls -lR option allows complex file iteration and guest analysis.

   - virt-win-reg supports HKEY_USERS\<SID> and HKEY_USERS\<username>.

   - virt-win-reg new option --unsafe-printable-strings allows printable
     strings to be displayed in the output (unsafely: read the documentation
     before using).

   - virt-edit has been rewritten in C.

=head3 API and language bindings

   - Java is now completely supported.
     See http://libguestfs.org/guestfs-java.3.html

   - JRuby is supported via the Java bindings.

   - guestfs_close now appears in trace messages.

   - Python binding adds explicit g.close() method.

   - Python programs can now use the new event API.

   - Python GIL is released during libguestfs calls, allowing multithreaded
     Python programs to work properly.

   - 9pfs (Plan 9 filesystems exported from the host) are now supported.

   - Add -DGUESTFS_WARN_DEPRECATED=1 to warn about use of deprecated API
     functions in C programs.

   - New manual page guestfs-recipes(1) with recipes.

   - mkfs-opts can now set inode size and sector size on created filesystems
     (thanks Nikita Menkovich).

   - guestfs_last_errno is now accessible from OCaml (as g#last_errno ()).

=head2 Security

 - optargs_bitmask is checked even for calls that have no optional
   arguments.  This closes a possible exploit in the daemon from
   untrusted callers.

=head2 New APIs

  btrfs-filesystem-resize, get-pgroup, inspect-get-icon, is-zero,
  is-zero-device, list-9p, list-dm-devices, mount-9p, ntfsresize-opts,
  set-pgroup, write-append

=head2 Internals

 - Coverity (a static analysis tool) was run across the codebase and
   many fixes were made.

 - Generator can handle functions that return RBufferOut and have
   optional arguments.

 - Compatible with Perl 5.14.

 - Compatible with gcc 4.6.

 - Perform safety checks on QEMU.

 - C API tests can now fully test calls that have optional arguments.

 - Use ./configure --enable-install-daemon to install /usr/sbin/guestfsd.

 - po-docs directory now covers all man pages.

 - stderr from qemu process is now captured by the event subsystem.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 602997 part-get-bootable gives wrong result with an unordered part layout
 - 661280 virt-rescue: panic when shutting down: "/sbin/reboot: No such file or directory"
 - 700369 qemu-system-x86_64 says 'KVM not supported for this target'
 - 705200 guestmount attempt results in access denied
 - 714981 'list-filesystems' does not know about virtio 9p filesystems or detect existing mounts
 - 717786 libguestfs python bindings should have an explicit close call
 - 721275 virt-resize in F16 should support btrfs

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 Release notes for libguestfs 1.10.0

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.8.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

 - libguestfs and tools can be used against live virtual machines.
   See the 'guestfish --live' and 'guestmount --live' options, and (for
   the low-level interface) the new APIs set-attach-method and
   get-attach-method.

 - New virt tools:
   virt-copy-in, virt-copy-out, virt-tar-in, virt-tar-out.

 - libguestfs can get the drive letter mappings for Windows guests.

 - virt-inspector displays drive letter mappings for Windows guests.

 - Drive letters can now be used in virt-edit and guestfish programs
   when operating on Windows guests.

 - virt-resize now works on 32 bit hosts.

 - You can now inspect the install disks and live CDs of many different
   operating systems.

 - guestfish <! cmd which executes a shell cmd and inlines the result.

 - guestfish, guestmount, virt-rescue now all support --ro and --rw
   options, and the default for this can be chosen via a configuration
   file (/etc/libguestfs-tools.conf).

 - New event API allows more than one callback to be registered for
   each event, makes it possible to call the API from other languages,
   and allows nearly all log, debug and trace messages to be rerouted
   from stderr.

 - Greater FHS compliance for temporary files, including using /var/tmp
   for large cached files that should survive reboot (instead of /tmp).

 - guestfish, guestmount -m option allows mount options to be passed
   through to the underlying filesystem.

 - mkfs-opts allows filesystem features to be specified.

 - More intelligent handling of mountpoints, allowing mkmountpoint, mount
   and umount-all commands to work together properly.

 - Trace messages are prefixed with a distinct string, allowing them to
   be easily 'grepped' out from debug output.

 - guestfs_launch (guestfish 'run' command) now produces progress
   messages (a guestfish progress bar) if it takes longer than 5
   seconds to run.

 - Several long-running commands where we are unable to estimate time
   to completion generate "pulse mode" progress events.  Progress bar
   in guestfish has been updated to display these.

 - Publish new example code in: C, Perl, Python, OCaml, Ruby.

 - New virt-dhcp-address example program.

 - The Java and Ruby bindings have been improved greatly.

 - Perl includes a way to get the errno of the last error.

 - Python bindings now compatible with rpyc (thanks Erez Shinan).

 - Transifex is now being used to manage translations.
   http://www.transifex.net/projects/p/libguestfs/

 - Inspection now supports Red Hat Desktop, Slackware distributions.

 - Inspection no longer fails for Windows guests that have two or
   more disks.

 - Inspection can now tell the difference between Windows 2008 Server
   and Windows 7.

 - Inspection can detect 32 bit applications installed in 64 bit
   Windows, running on the WOW64 emulator.

 - A series of protocol fixes has fixed the old bug RHBZ#576879
   which used to cause errors during the upload command to lose
   protocol synchronization.

 - New logo!

=head2 Security

  [none]

=head2 New APIs

  first-private, get-attach-method, inspect-get-drive-mappings,
  inspect-get-product-variant,
  inspect-get-windows-current-control-set, next-private, resize2fs-M,
  set-attach-method.

=head2 Internals

 - The 'HACKING' file is obsolete.  The contents have been moved into
   a section of the guestfs(3) manual page.

 - libguestfs-test-tool simplified.  It no longer needs the static
   binary or tries to construct an ISO.

 - rpcgen-generated files are compiled with -fno-strict-aliasing
   which should be safer (thanks Matt Booth).

 - virt-resize was rewritten in OCaml.

 - guestfish and other tools tested with valgrind; some memory leaks
   were fixed.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 502533 Updated Polish translation of libguestfs
 - 576879 libguestfs protocol loses synchronization if you 'upload' before mounting disks
 - 599503 document that mkmountpoint and umount-all cannot be mixed
 - 617440 guestfish: fails to tilde expand '~' when the $HOME env is unset
 - 664558 RFE: Allow to set log callback in Ruby bindings
 - 665358 Punjabi Translation Completed (pa_IN)
 - 666577 libguestfs: unknown filesystem /dev/fd0
 - 667610 Multiple bugs, memory leaks in libguestfs ruby bindings
 - 668112 virt-filesystems command fails on guest with corrupt filesystem label
 - 668574 guestfish -i is trying to mount all mounts from /etc/fstab and fails with an error when device doesn't exists
 - 673479 Add a grep-friendly string to LIBGUESTFS_TRACE output
 - 674130 Inspection code fails for Windows guest with two disks
 - 682756 libguestfs trace segfaults when list-filesystems returns error
 - 682979 libguestfs incorrectly detects Red Hat desktop as 'redhat-based' instead of 'redhat'
 - 690819 mkfs fails creating a filesystem on a disk device when using a disk with 'ide' interface
 - 691389 Extended attributes don't work over guestmount (FUSE)
 - 691724 virt-inspector reports unknown filesystem /dev/vda1
 - 692545 inspect-list-applications fails to detect 32 bit apps installed under WOW64 emulator on 64 bit Windows
 - 693324 sfdisk's python interface only accepts lists of type 'list' for the lines parameter

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 Release notes for libguestfs 1.8

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.6.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

 - Support and packages for Debian and Ubuntu.

 - Daily builds from git repository on Debian and Ubuntu to reduce risk
   of regressions.

 - Port to ArchLinux 'pacman' (thanks Thomas S Hatch).

 - The following tools have been rewritten in C (originally in Perl):

     . virt-cat
     . virt-df
     . virt-inspector
     . virt-ls
     . virt-rescue

 - Some C tools support encrypted guests automatically.  This is
   supported in: guestfish, guestmount, virt-cat, virt-inspector,
   virt-ls.

 - New tool virt-filesystems (in C) which is a replacement for
   virt-list-filesystems and virt-list-partitions, and has a superset
   of the functionality of those tools.

 - guestfish, guestmount and the C tools use unified command line option
   parsing, so they support many common options such as '-a disk.img',
   '-d libvirt-domain', '-x', '-v'.  The old command line option
   parsing is preserved for compatibility in scripts etc.

 - guestfish no longer has any dependencies on Perl

 - New man pages containing programming examples: guestfs-examples(3) (C/C++),
   guestfs-ocaml(3), guestfs-python(3), guestfs-ruby(3).

 - Trace mode prints return values from API functions.

 - virt-inspector can list applications installed in Windows guests, along
   with a great deal of information about those applications.

 - Add support for inspecting: Linux Mint, Mandriva, FreeBSD.

 - guestfish --rw option (with no effect currently) to make potentially
   dangerous write access explicit.

 - guestfish --listen --csh for compatibility with csh, tcsh (thanks
   Eric Blake).

 - The first upstream version that introduced each API function is now
   documented in guestfs(3).

 - guestfs_last_errno allows you to retrieve the errno from the
   daemon, correctly translated to the local operating system.

 - Functions can now have optional parameters.

 - Progress bars and progress notifications can now happen for upload
   commands.

 - Appliance builder more careful about not leaving temporary files
   around in /tmp.

 - getfattr/setfattr commands added to virt-rescue.

 - ROADMAP file covers roadmap and goals for future releases.

=head2 Security

 - New SECURITY section in guestfs(3) API documentation.

 - virt-inspector no longer runs any guest commands.

 - Inspection code is more careful about avoiding very large files
   from guests which might previously have caused a denial of service.

 - FUSE calls into guestmount are now traced when using guestmount -x.

=head2 New APIs

 - add-domain
 - add-drive-opts
 - getxattr
 - inspect-get-hostname
 - inspect-get-package-format
 - inspect-get-package-management
 - inspect-get-roots
 - inspect-list-applications
 - lgetxattr
 - mkfs-opts

=head2 Internals

 - C programs now only link precisely with the libraries that they use.

 - PCRE, libmagic, hivex and libvirt libraries are now completely
   optional for building.

 - Multiple memory leaks and file descriptor leaks fixed.

 - Add a POD wrapper to unify generation of man pages and HTML files
   across all programs.

 - Source includes phony images of Fedora, Debian, Ubuntu and
   Windows guests.

 - Ruby bindings have 'make install' rule.

 - <guestfs.h> is now a single file.

 - <guestfs.h> does not require XDR headers.

 - ocaml xml-light library is no longer required to build (thanks
   Maxim Koltsov).

 - ./configure --disable-[...] for each language binding (thanks
   Maxim Koltsov).

 - Old ocaml-viewer program removed (use guestfs-browser instead).

 - New C API test type 'InitScratchFS' makes the tests run a little
   more quickly.

 - Excluded packages in the appliance are now listed in a separate
   file appliance/excludelist.in, and can be customized per-distro.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 663407 readlink and readlinklist returns /sysroot/ in some paths
 - 661280 virt-rescue: panic when shutting down: "/sbin/reboot: No such file or directory"
 - 657499 checksum: wrong check sum type causes umount to fail
 - 655554 Whole disk paths are not made canonical by virt-inspector
 - 654638 openssl updated to 1.0.0b libguestfs depends on exact file names
 - 652796 ruby bindings not installed by 'make install', hence omitted from the binary distribution

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.6

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.4.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

 - Use a new method for creating and caching the appliance.  This
   greatly improves the performance of libguestfs, often by a factor
   of x 4 to x 5.

 - Support for guest inspection (like virt-inspector) via the ordinary
   API and all language bindings.  'guestfish -i' option is as a side-
   effect much quicker.

 - virt-inspector and core inspection API can now detect guests running:
   Fedora, Debian, Ubuntu, Windows, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, CentOS,
   Scientific Linux, Gentoo, Pardus, Arch Linux, MeeGo.

 - Support for LUKS whole-disk encryption in guests.

 - PHP bindings.

 - Progress messages (and progress bars in guestfish and virt-resize)
   for certain long-running operations.

 - virt-df is now much more efficient.  Use '--one-per-guest' to restore
   the old per-guest isolation behaviour.

 - guestfish 'copy-in' and 'copy-out' commands for copying files and
   directories recursively in and out of the guest.

 - guestfish 'hexedit' command for doing binary edits to devices and
   files.

 - Change guestfish -i syntax to allow commands to be specified on the
   command line (retaining backwards compatibility).

 - guestfish '-d <domain>' for adding disks from libvirt domains.

 - guestfish '-N' option supports several new prepared disk image types:
         lvfs : disk with LV formatted with filesystem
           lv : disk with LV
     bootroot : boot+root
   bootrootlv : boot and root on LV

 - guestfish 'more' and 'edit' commands now work with arbitrary files.

 - guestfish '--echo-keys' option allows you to echo keys/passphrases
   while typing them.

 - guestmount now supports -a / -d / -i options, like guestfish.

 - Use virtio-serial for communications with the appliance.  This
   also has a major performance benefit.

 - virt-edit '-b' option to create a backup of edited files.

 - virt-edit '-e' option for non-interactive edits to files.

 - Ability to capture core dumps from the appliance (thanks Matthew Booth).

 - virt-rescue now shuts down cleanly (thanks Matthew Booth).

 - virt-rescue now has a --network option to enable network access.

 - virt-resize can now handle guests which use GPT partition table format.

 - virt-resize has better support for shrinking guests.

 - virt-resize supports qcow2-format guests.

 - $TMPDIR can be used to override almost all temporary directory usage.

 - OCaml users can use an alternate OO-style of coding, eg. g#launch ()

 - The API supports calls which take optional parameters, eg.
     $g->add_drive_opts ("disk", readonly => 1);

 - Trace output now escapes and shortens large strings (thanks
   Matthew Booth).

 - Autosync is now on by default, resulting in more reliable behaviour
   when the handle is closed.

 - virt-df --uuid option allows you to follow a domain across migration
   and renaming.

 - Translations of manual pages.

=head2 Security

 - CVE-2010-3851 libguestfs: missing disk format specifier when adding a disk
   https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2010-October/msg00036.html
   This is comprehensively fixed in this release, and the fix will be
   backported to the other stable branches after more testing.

 - virt-inspector no longer relies on untrusted guest code to list
   applications in some guests.

=head2 New APIs

  download-offset, file-architecture, findfs-label, findfs-uuid,
  inspect-os, inspect-get-arch, inspect-get-distro,
  inspect-get-filesystems, inspect-get-major-version,
  inspect-get-minor-version, inspect-get-mountpoints,
  inspect-get-product-name, inspect-get-type, is-blockdev, is-chardev,
  is-fifo, is-lv, is-socket, is-symlink, list-filesystems, luks-add-key,
  luks-close, luks-format, luks-format-cipher, luks-kill-slot,
  luks-open, luks-open-ro, lvm-clear-filter, lvm-canonical-lv-name,
  lvm-set-filter, part-to-dev, pread-device, pwrite-device,
  upload-offset

=head2 Internals

 - Use size_t for loop iterators.
 - Refactor the library code into separate files.
 - Refactor the generator code into separate files.
 - Generate guestfish commands.
 - guestfish & guestmount options processing is unified.
 - Protocol changes:
     error message size increased to 64K
     send errno to library
 - Add 'make bindist' to make a binary distribution.
 - Cleaner behaviour under valgrind.
 - More testing of the guestfish command line options and libvirt
   integration.
 - The Perl inspection code is no longer used by any of the tools.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 646822 libguestfs trace mode should not print long binary strings
 - 646821 virt-df should have --uuid option
 - 646432 /dev/mapper paths should not be returned from guestfs_mountpoints
 - 643624 libguestfs tools documentation should describe how to quote guest domain names from shell
 - 642934 No way to specify disk format when adding a disk to libguestfs
 - 642933 guestfs_list_filesystems should be used in all possible places
 - 642932 guestmount options should match guestfish options
 - 642930 virt-inspector (Sys::Guestfs::Lib) should use C inspection APIs
 - 642929 C inspection code should ignore /dev/fd* in /etc/fstab
 - 642826 virt-resize converts any other image format to raw without notifying user, instructions do not account for this
 - 640961 Document that grub-install might be needed for old Linux guests after virt-resize
 - 639986 virt-df --csv does not properly quote " in libvirt domain names
 - 639405 Interrupted cached appliance creation leaves libguestfs unusable
 - 638901 Appliance filename should not contain repository name
 - 638899 /dev/mapper paths should not be returned from C inspection APIs
 - 636918 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 636061 [abrt] guestfish-1.2.11-1.fc12: malloc_consolidate: Process /usr/bin/guestfish was killed by signal 11 (SIGSEGV)
 - 635969 glob echo mkfs ext2 /dev/vd[b-t]1 prints garbage
 - 634246 guestfs_part_get_parttype returns "loop" when run against a partition, LV or filesystem
 - 633766 virt-resize --shrink fails
 - 633357 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 633096 virt-resize calculates block device size incorrectly, doesn't work with qcow2 target
 - 629593 Dutch translation added
 - 627556 Updates to Spanish translations of libguestfs
 - 626843 Updates to Spanish translations
 - 619793 [RFE] Need a way to determine if a particular block device is a logical volume
 - 618556 virt-rescue return none zero value when exit
 - 617200 mount operation failed and hung on some images which running in read-only mode
 - 610880 libguestfs should set broader read perms on tmpdir, so works in some situations when executed with umask 077
 - 599503 document that mkmountpoint and umount-all cannot be mixed
 - 571714 Running virt-df on disk image relabels it, so qemu can no longer write to it.
 - 502533 Updated Polish translation of libguestfs

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.4

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.2.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

 - guestfish lets you choose a prepared disk image, eg:
     guestfish -N fs:ext4

 - Add write support to guestmount (FUSE) module.

 - virt-resize can now resize the content of partitions and logical
   volumes in the guest, and we have better support for shrinking guests.

 - Bash tab-completion script for guestfish.

 - Add ZFS support to virt-rescue.

 - New tool 'virt-make-fs' for creating filesystems with content.

 - Allow suffixes on any guestfish number parameter, eg. "1M".

 - guestfish 'man' command opens the manual page.

 - guestfish supports a "heredoc" syntax for uploading files:
     upload -<<_end_ /foo
     content
     _end_

 - Some guestfish commands now print their output in octal or hex
   where appropriate (RHBZ#583242).

 - Allow dash prefix on guestfish command line.  This ignores any
   error from the second command:                   (RHBZ#578407)
     guestfish -- cmd1 : -cmd2 : cmd3

 - guestfish -h / help command now returns an error for non-existent
   commands (RHBZ#597145).

 - New 'supported' command in guestfish to list optional groups of
   commands which are supported by the daemon / configuration.

 - virt-inspector and guestfish -i now work for filenames which
   contain spaces (RHBZ#507810).

 - Change the protocol to use link-local addresses, to avoid
   conflicting with any address that the host might be using
   (RHBZ#588763).

 - libguestfs now sets the correct time and timezone on filesystem
   modifications.

 - Sort the domains into alphabetical order in virt-df.

 - Make mkfs-b command work for FAT and NTFS by mapping the blocksize
   parameter to the cluster size (RHBZ#599464).

 - Add version numbers to Perl modules (RHBZ#521674).

 - Localization now works for all the libguestfs tools (RHBZ#559963).

 - Tools now support filesystem-on-image VMs (RHBZ#590167).

 - virt-list-partitions has a '-t' option to show the total size of disks.

 - Include extra Augeas lenses in the supermin appliance (Matthew Booth).

 - Add error and close callbacks.

 - Add explicit close method in the Perl API.

 - Multiple fixes for RHEL 5 compatibility.

 - Multiple fixes for Debian/Ubuntu compatibility.

 - Multiple revisions to improve the documentation.

=head2 Security

 - Fix a potential DoS in virt-inspector and virt-v2v if a specially
   crafted disk image contained a char device in place of one of the
   configuration files that we read under /etc (RHBZ#582484).

=head2 New APIs

 - aug-clear - clear Augeas path
 - available-all-groups - return a list of all optional groups
 - base64-in - upload base64-encoded data to file
 - base64-out - download file and encode as base64
 - checksum-device - compute checksums on the contents of a device
 - checksums-out - compute checksums of multiple files in a directory
 - debug-upload - upload a file to the appliance
 - fallocate64 - preallocate a file in the guest filesystem
 - fill-pattern - fill a file with a repeating pattern of bytes
 - get-umask - get the current umask
 - lvresize-free - expand an LV to fill free space
 - ntfsresize - resize an NTFS filesystem
 - ntfsresize-size - resize an NTFS filesystem (with size)
 - part-del - delete a partition
 - part-get-bootable - get the bootable flag of a partition
 - part-get-mbr-id - get the MBR type byte of a partition
 - part-set-mbr-id - set the MBR type byte of a partition
 - pvresize-size - resize a physical volume (with size)
 - pwrite - write to part of a file
 - resize2fs-size - resize an ext2/3/4 filesystem (with size)
 - txz-in - unpack compressed tarball to directory (RHBZ#580556)
 - txz-out - pack directory into compressed tarball (RHBZ#580556)
 - vfs-label - get the filesystem label
 - vfs-uuid - get the filesystem UUID
 - vgscan - rescan for LVM physical volumes, volume groups and logical volumes
 - write - create a new file
 - zero-device - write zeroes to an entire device

=head2 Internals

 - Extend the generator to support testing optional features.
 - Stricter checks on input parameters to many calls (RHBZ#501893 RHBZ#501894)
 - Extend the protocol to support sending arbitrary 8 bit data buffers.
 - Ship 'BUGS' file with releases.  This is a summary of the bugs in
   the Red Hat Bugzilla database.
 - Ship 'RELEASE-NOTES' file with releases, containing release notes.
 - Unify supermin appliance building into one place, in febootstrap 2.7.
 - Fix the protocol code to handle the case where both ends send cancel
   messages at the same time.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 612178 guestfish: using -m option in conjunction with --listen option causes appliance to die
 - 610880 libguestfs should set broader read perms on tmpdir, so works in some situations when executed with umask 077
 - 604691 OCaml bindings are not thread safe
 - 603870 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 602592 [RFE] expose guestfs_close in perl bindings
 - 600977 virt-df -h --csv "Argument .. isn't numeric in printf"
 - 599464 mkfs-b does not support vfat/ntfs
 - 598807 add_cdrom does not work in RHEL 6
 - 598309 part-list and several other cmd failed on libguestfs on RHEL5
 - 597145 guestfish 'help' command should indicate error in exit status with an unknown command
 - 597135 guestfish write-file cmd does not check "size" parameter
 - 597118 A warning should be given in the help of mke2journal-L for the length of label
 - 597112 get-e2uuid should use blkid instead of "tune2fs -l" to get filesystem UUID
 - 596776 virt-inspector doesn't discover modprobe aliases on RHEL 3 guests
 - 596763 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 593292 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 592883 can not edit files on  images mounted with guestmount cmd
 - 592360 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 591250 virt-tar prints "tar_in: tar subcommand failed on directory" if the archive is compressed or not in the right format
 - 591155 virt-tar prints "tar_in: tar subcommand failed on directory" if a disk image is not writable
 - 591142 virt-inspector should give an error for unrecognized disk images
 - 590167 virt-inspector and other virt tools should be able to handle filesystem-on-image VMs
 - 589039 guestfish read-file cmd will cause daemon hang when read large files
 - 588851 guestfs_launch() returns -1, but guestfs_last_error() == NULL
 - 588763 libguestfs should use non-public or link-local addresses for appliance network
 - 588733 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 588651 guestfish 'strings-e' cmd does not give proper error message or hint
 - 587484 lvresize can't reduce size of a volumn
 - 585961 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 585223 ntfsresize should support shrinking filesystems
 - 585222 pvresize should support shrinking PVs
 - 585221 resize2fs should support shrinking filesystems
 - 584038 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 583554 [FEAT] mknod-mode command is needed to set mode explicitly
 - 583242 [RFE] guestfish should print outputs in a suitable base (eg. octal for modes)
 - 582993 guestfish eats words when tab completing case (in)sensitive paths
 - 582953 Misleading help information about lvcreate command
 - 582948 mknod command doesn't make block, character or FIFO devices
 - 582929 mknod doesn't check for invalid mode
 - 582901 guestfish chmod/umask commands do not check invalid mode value
 - 582899 guestfish:sparse is missed from command autocomplete list
 - 582891 [Feature Request] behavior and return value of guestfish umask cmd should be changed
 - 582548 [mknod] umask shouldn't take effect when mode is set explicitly
 - 582484 some guestfish sub commands can not handle special files properly
 - 582252 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 581501 Updates to Spanish translation
 - 580650 virt-inspector warns "No grub default specified at /usr/lib/perl5/Sys/Guestfs/Lib.pm at [...]"
 - 580556 request for libguestfs to support .txz tarballs
 - 580246 tar-in command hangs if uploading more than available space
 - 580016 aug-ls in guestfish does not take augeas variable as argument
 - 579664 guestfish doesn't report error when there is not enough space for image allocation
 - 579608 multiple commands in guestfish can not work for symbol links
 - 579155 libguestfs hangs if qemu doesn't start (in null vmchannel mode)
 - 578407 the prefix '-' in sub-command isn't handled by guestfish in remote control mode
 - 576879 libguestfs protocol loses synchronization if you 'upload' before mounting disks
 - 559963 libguestfs Perl programs do set locale, but still localization doesn't work
 - 521674 Perl modules are unversioned, but should carry version numbers
 - 516096 Race condition in test_swapon_label_0: /sbin/blockdev: BLKRRPART: Device or resource busy
 - 507810 guestfish -i / virt-inspector cannot handle spaces in filenames
 - 502533 Updated Polish translation of libguestfs
 - 501894 Some String parameters should be OptString
 - 501893 String parameters should be checked for != NULL
 - 501889 write-file does not support strings containing ASCII NUL
 - 484986 grub-install fails on virtio disk

=for comment ################################################################

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR HISTORICAL VERSIONS OF LIBGUESTFS

Before 2010 libguestfs did not have official release notes or a
formalized version numbering system.  However these are links to
historically significant versions.

=over 4

=item 2009-11-10 (1.0.78)

L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2009-November/msg00095.html>

=item 2009-09-13 (1.0.67)

L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2009-August/msg00281.html>

=item 2009-07-23 (1.0.64)

L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2009-July/msg00059.html>

=item 2009-07-14 (1.0.59)

L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/libguestfs/2009-July/msg00023.html>

=item 2009-04-01 (the initial announcement)

L<http://rwmj.wordpress.com/2009/04/01/libguestfs-access-and-modify-virtual-machine-disk-images/>

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2019 Red Hat Inc.
