=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.10

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.8.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

 - libguestfs and tools can be used against live virtual machines.
   See the 'guestfish --live' and 'guestmount --live' options, and (for
   the low-level interface) the new APIs set-attach-method and
   get-attach-method.

 - New virt tools:
   virt-copy-in, virt-copy-out, virt-tar-in, virt-tar-out.

 - libguestfs can get the drive letter mappings for Windows guests.

 - virt-inspector displays drive letter mappings for Windows guests.

 - Drive letters can now be used in virt-edit and guestfish programs
   when operating on Windows guests.

 - virt-resize now works on 32 bit hosts.

 - You can now inspect the install disks and live CDs of many different
   operating systems.

 - guestfish <! cmd which executes a shell cmd and inlines the result.

 - guestfish, guestmount, virt-rescue now all support --ro and --rw
   options, and the default for this can be chosen via a configuration
   file (/etc/libguestfs-tools.conf).

 - New event API allows more than one callback to be registered for
   each event, makes it possible to call the API from other languages,
   and allows nearly all log, debug and trace messages to be rerouted
   from stderr.

 - Greater FHS compliance for temporary files, including using /var/tmp
   for large cached files that should survive reboot (instead of /tmp).

 - guestfish, guestmount -m option allows mount options to be passed
   through to the underlying filesystem.

 - mkfs-opts allows filesystem features to be specified.

 - More intelligent handling of mountpoints, allowing mkmountpoint, mount
   and umount-all commands to work together properly.

 - Trace messages are prefixed with a distinct string, allowing them to
   be easily 'grepped' out from debug output.

 - guestfs_launch (guestfish 'run' command) now produces progress
   messages (a guestfish progress bar) if it takes longer than 5
   seconds to run.

 - Several long-running commands where we are unable to estimate time
   to completion generate "pulse mode" progress events.  Progress bar
   in guestfish has been updated to display these.

 - Publish new example code in: C, Perl, Python, OCaml, Ruby.

 - New virt-dhcp-address example program.

 - The Java and Ruby bindings have been improved greatly.

 - Perl includes a way to get the errno of the last error.

 - Python bindings now compatible with rpyc (thanks Erez Shinan).

 - Transifex is now being used to manage translations.
   http://www.transifex.net/projects/p/libguestfs/

 - Inspection now supports Red Hat Desktop, Slackware distributions.

 - Inspection no longer fails for Windows guests that have two or
   more disks.

 - Inspection can now tell the difference between Windows 2008 Server
   and Windows 7.

 - Inspection can detect 32 bit applications installed in 64 bit
   Windows, running on the WOW64 emulator.

 - A series of protocol fixes has fixed the old bug RHBZ#576879
   which used to cause errors during the upload command to lose
   protocol synchronization.

 - New logo!

=head2 Security

  [none]

=head2 New APIs

  first-private, get-attach-method, inspect-get-drive-mappings,
  inspect-get-product-variant,
  inspect-get-windows-current-control-set, next-private, resize2fs-M,
  set-attach-method.

=head2 Internals

 - The 'HACKING' file is obsolete.  The contents have been moved into
   a section of the guestfs(3) manual page.

 - libguestfs-test-tool simplified.  It no longer needs the static
   binary or tries to construct an ISO.

 - rpcgen-generated files are compiled with -fno-strict-aliasing
   which should be safer (thanks Matt Booth).

 - virt-resize was rewritten in OCaml.

 - guestfish and other tools tested with valgrind; some memory leaks
   were fixed.

=head2 Bugs fixed

 - 502533 Updated Polish translation of libguestfs
 - 576879 libguestfs protocol loses synchronization if you 'upload' before mounting disks
 - 599503 document that mkmountpoint and umount-all cannot be mixed
 - 617440 guestfish: fails to tilde expand '~' when the $HOME env is unset
 - 664558 RFE: Allow to set log callback in Ruby bindings
 - 665358 Punjabi Translation Completed (pa_IN)
 - 666577 libguestfs: unknown filesystem /dev/fd0
 - 667610 Multiple bugs, memory leaks in libguestfs ruby bindings
 - 668112 virt-filesystems command fails on guest with corrupt filesystem label
 - 668574 guestfish -i is trying to mount all mounts from /etc/fstab and fails with an error when device doesn't exists
 - 673479 Add a grep-friendly string to LIBGUESTFS_TRACE output
 - 674130 Inspection code fails for Windows guest with two disks
 - 682756 libguestfs trace segfaults when list-filesystems returns error
 - 682979 libguestfs incorrectly detects Red Hat desktop as 'redhat-based' instead of 'redhat'
 - 690819 mkfs fails creating a filesystem on a disk device when using a disk with 'ide' interface
 - 691389 Extended attributes don't work over guestmount (FUSE)
 - 691724 virt-inspector reports unknown filesystem /dev/vda1
 - 692545 inspect-list-applications fails to detect 32 bit apps installed under WOW64 emulator on 64 bit Windows
 - 693324 sfdisk's python interface only accepts lists of type 'list' for the lines parameter

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
