=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.50

These are the release notes for libguestfs stable release 1.50.
This describes the major changes since 1.48.

Libguestfs 1.50.0 was released on B<7 February 2023>.

=head2 Language bindings

Fix the PHP bindings for PHP8 (Geoff Amey).

Fix various deprecation warnings in the GObject bindings.

We no longer use the deprecated Python distutils library
(thanks Miro Hrončok).

=head2 Inspection

When listing the packages in RPM-based guests, the inspection API no
longer checks package signatures.  This is because the newer librpm
used by libguestfs does not understand signatures stored in older
guests, such as SHA1 used by RHEL 6 (thanks Panu Matilainen).

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_inspect_get_hostname> can now handle
F</etc/hostname> files containing comments (thanks Dawid Zamirski).

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_file_architecture> can now parse files using zstd
compression.

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_inspect_get_osinfo> now returns the correct
osinfo field for Windows 11.  However because of decisions made by
Microsoft, these guests still return product name and other strings
identifying as Windows 10 (thanks Yaakov Selkowitz, Yongkui Guo).

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_device_name> is a new API to read the device name
associated with a drive, for example calling this with C<0> will
return C</dev/sda>.

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_clevis_luks_unlock> is a new API for unlocking
disks using the Clevis/Tang network-based full disk encryption scheme.
Furthermore implement this in guestfish and guestmount (Laszlo Ersek).

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_inspect_get_build_id> is a new API for reading
the build ID from some Linux and Windows guests.  It is not widely
used on Linux, but for Windows it is vital for identifying Windows 11.

=head3 Other API changes

In the L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_add_drive> API, the C<name> and C<iface>
fields are not used.  C<name> has not been used since around 2017, but
the documentation has only just been updated to reflect this.
C<iface> was never allowed for the libvirt backend and didn't work
reliably with the direct backend (Laszlo Ersek).

L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_readdir> is no longer limited to the maximum
message size but can read a directory of any size (Laszlo Ersek).

=head2 Build changes

B<Note> that the Augeas bindings for libguestfs are no longer bundled
with libguestfs and must be built separately.  See:
L<https://people.redhat.com/~rjones/augeas/>  For RHEL 7+ rebuilding
the Fedora Rawhide package will work.

B<Note> that libguestfs now requires minimum OCaml 4.04.  It will not
compile on RHEL 6.

B<Note> that zstd is now a required dependency.

OCaml gettext is no longer a dependency of libguestfs.  (Plain gettext
is still optionally used to translate C source files.)

Add support for OCaml 4.14.

Fix build for missing stdlib functions in OCaml 4.04.

Fix C<./configure --disable-ocaml>.  OCaml is still required to build
libguestfs, but this now correctly disables the OCaml bindings of the
API.

Add support for building on Artix, Rocky and Virtuozzo (Halil Tezcan
KARABULUT, Neil Hanlon, Andrey Drobyshev).  In addition when working
out the local distro we now look at C<$ID_LIKE> in F</etc/os-release>
before C<$ID> which helps on Arch (thanks S D Rausty).

Add preliminary support for compiling libguestfs on macOS.

Fix website description of cloning the libguestfs repository (Kashyap
Chamarthy).

We no longer use glibc custom printf.

We no longer use C<LD_PRELOAD=libSegFault.so> in the appliance.  This
feature was removed in glibc 2.35.

We no longer use dtrace / systemtap probes.

=head2 Internals

Fix regression tests to use correct paths (Nikolay Shirokovskiy).

Various improvements to qcow2 appliance handling (Andrey Drobyshev).

Disable 5-level page tables in qemu.  This avoids a bug in older
versions of qemu.

Disable the LVM2 devicesfile in the appliance since it interferes with
cloned LVs that have the same UUID (Laszlo Ersek).

Don't use C<-cpu max> on RISC-V as it is not yet supported by qemu's
TCG emulation of that architecture.  This will be reenabled when qemu
gets support.

Avoid a rare hang that would happen when launching the appliance.
This turned out to be caused by using the unsafe call L<setenv(3)>
between fork and exec (thanks Siddhesh Poyarekar).

When running the file command inside the appliance we now disable
seccomp since it interferes with processing compressed files (thanks
David Runge, Toolybird).

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.48.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2108425>

compile of libguestfs-1.48.4 fails with Error: static declaration of ‘caml_alloc_initialized_string’ follows non-static declaration

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2064182>

SHA 1 signatures required to inspect packages in RHEL 6 guests

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2033247>

document encrypted RBD disk limitation

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2012658>

libguestfs fails to detect Windows 11 guest image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1965941>

lvm-set-filter failed in guestfish with the latest lvm2 package

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1844341>

The duplicate block device is listed when iface is set to 'virtio'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1809453>

[RFE] Add support for LUKS encrypted disks with Clevis & Tang

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1794518>

Rewrite libguestfs use of setfiles so that it doesn't stop on ext4 immutable bits

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1674392>

No return values from a directory listing when there are simply too many files in that directory (NULL value return)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1554735>

RFE: customize --selinux-relabel should be the default, with --no-selinux-relabel used to opt out

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.48.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Adolfo Jayme Barrientos

=item Andrey Drobyshev

=item Emilio Herrera

=item Ettore Atalan

=item Geoff Amey

=item Hela Basa

=item Jan Kuparinen

=item Kashyap Chamarthy

=item Laszlo Ersek

=item Marcin Stanclik

=item Michał Smyk

=item Neil Hanlon

=item Nikolay Shirokovskiy

=item Pavel Borecki

=item Piotr Drąg

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Ricky Tigg

=item Temuri Doghonadze

=item Yuri Chornoivan

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
