=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.60

These are the release notes for libguestfs stable release 1.60.
This describes the major changes since 1.58.

Libguestfs 1.60.0 was released on B<XXX July 2026>.

=head2 Inspection

Add support for Kylin, NeoKylin and Anolis Linux distributions (grass
lu).

Guests using Veritas partition tables (reusing the Sun partition type)
can now be inspected.

Windows Defender (antivirus) is now detected if present in Windows
guests (Susant Sahani).

=head2 API

New C<guestfs_xfs_info2> API.  This is similar to the existing
C<guestfs_xfs_info> API but returns a flexible hashtable allowing more
fields to be added to the output in future.

C<guestfs_get_hv> now returns the default hypervisor.

C<guestfs_tar_in> adds a new option C<keepdirlink> which controls the
tar I<--keep-directory-symlink> flag (Anders Roxell).

C<guestfs_xfs_repair> C<maxmem> option now produces better error
messages if maxmem is too small.

All functions that take LUKS key parameters may now use either
C<text:...> or C<base64:...> prefixes, allowing binary keys to be
encoded as base64 and passed to these APIs.  L<guestfish(1)> and other
tools taking a key file now allow a binary file to be used.

C<guestfs_command*> and C<guestfs_sh*> now use a bind mount to
override C</etc/resolv.conf> inside the guest, allowing these commands
to work even when this file is marked as immutable, a common change
that system administrators make (Srihari Parimi).

=head2 Tools

New L<guestfish(1)> C<not> subcommand, which negates the status of a
command.

=head2 Language bindings

GObject and Vala bindings were removed.  They were previously
deprecated in libguestfs 1.56 (Cole Robinson).

=head2 Documentation

All information related to firstboot scripts was moved to and
consolidated in L<virt-customize(1)/FIRSTBOOT>.

Fix documentation of C<guestfs_copy_out> API.

=head2 Build changes

Fix Weblate (i18n) web hooks (Rafael Fontenelle).

Fix build when libselinux is not available (David Runge).

Github CI is now used more comprehensively (Cole Robinson).

Fix C<make dist> command when certain language bindings are disabled
(Cole Robinson).

C<./configure --with-qemu> was removed.

C<CFLAGS> is now prepended to the default, allowing default flags to
be overridden.  In addition I<-fPIC> is added to the default flags
(Cole Robinson).

Some bash completion scripts that were no longer used by libguestfs
(they moved to guestfs-tools) were removed.  Also new C<./configure
--with-bash-completion> and C<./configure --with-bash-completion-dir>
options were added (Christopher Byrne).

No longer over-link Lua bindings with libxml2 and libvirt (David
Runge).

=head2 Internals

Simplify qemu property testing.  Most of the code was eliminated
completely, and also we no longer start up an empty guest when
detecting if KVM is available (thanks Daniel Berrange).  Also we now
print stderr if qemu fails to start during detection (Hilko Bengen).

Use I<-cpu max> on RISC-V (thanks Apache553).

Very minimal support for Apple Filesystem (APFS) was added on Fedora.

Many memory and file descriptor leaks found by Claude Code were fixed
(shivanayak).

In the libguestfs appliance, increase the number of pre-process memory
maps.  This may allow xfs_repair to work on larger filesystems (Eric
Sandeen).

Fix DHCP on fast machines by making it wait for an address when
networking is enabled.  In addition use C<dhcpcd --debug> which makes
it easier to see if DHCP requests are working (Cole Robinson).

Improvements to debug output (Surya Gupta, Srihari Parimi).

Fix Fedora bin/sbin symlinking to be less noisy (Cole Robinson).

Rewrite xfs_repair and luks_* implementations in the daemon in OCaml.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.58.0..

=end comment

=over 4



=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.58.0..

=end comment

=over 4


=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2026 Red Hat Inc.
