=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.44

=head2 Language bindings

Python 2 support has been dropped.  The minimum version of Python
required is 3.6.

Python bindings no longer use deprecated C<PyEval_ThreadsInitialized>.

Python bindings now include type hints (Sam Eiderman).

Erlang bindings now use libei instead of liberl_interface
(Sergei Golovan).

=head2 Tools

L<virt-get-kernel(1)> can now find uncompressed kernels
(Pino Toscano).

L<virt-sysprep(1)> now regenerates the guest certificate store when a
certificate is removed from the guest (Pino Toscano).

L<virt-sysprep(1)> can now remove IPA enrollment files and Kerberos
keytabs (Pino Toscano, Christian Heimes and François Cami).

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

C<cryptsetup-open> and C<cryptsetup-close> replace C<luks-open>,
L<luks-open-ro> and L<luks-close>.  The new APIs add support for
BitLocker encryption.

=head3 Other API changes

C<lvm-canonical-lv> no longer produces a noisy error message when
called with a non-LV parameter.

=head2 Build changes

C programs using libguestfs can now be compiled against the build
directory:

 ../libguestfs/run ./configure
 ../libguestfs/run make

OCaml components are now linked correctly when building in a different
directory from the source (Geoff Toole).

GCC LTO is now supported.

Weblate is now used for localization instead of Zanata
(Pino Toscano).

The dependencies for guestfsd are no longer hard-coded but are now
generated from the built binary, ensuring that they shouldn't get out
of synch in future (Hilko Bengen).

=head2 Internals

F<lib/guestfs.h> was moved to F<include/guestfs.h> in the source.
This is not an externally visible change but affected a lot of places
inside the build system.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.42.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1811539>

The virt-diff command doesn't work on windows 2019 image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1384241>

The tar-in command does not allow restoring file capabilities

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=over 4

=item *

Andrey Shinkevich

=item *

Dmitry Tantsur

=item *

Geoff Toole

=item *

Hilko Bengen

=item *

Pino Toscano

=item *

Richard W.M. Jones

=item *

Sam Eiderman

=item *

Sergei Golovan

=item *

Thierry Vignaud

=item *

Yuri Chornoivan

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
