=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.30

These release notes only cover the differences from the previous
stable/dev branch split (1.28.0).  For detailed changelogs, please see
the git repository, or the ChangeLog file distributed in the tarball.

=head2 New features

=head3 New tools

L<virt-dib(1)> is a secure and safe alternative to the OpenStack
"diskimage-builder" tool.  It is compatible with diskimage-builder
elements.  (Pino Toscano)

L<virt-get-kernel(1)> extracts the kernel and ramdisk from a disk
image.  Previously this functionality was part of L<virt-builder(1)>,
but the new tool is more featureful.  (Pino Toscano)

=head3 New features in existing tools

L<virt-v2v(1)> I<-i ova> mode can now read a wider range of OVA files,
and also unpacked files (directories).

virt-v2v now securely passes options to curl, so passwords, cookies
and so on cannot be seen by users with shell access on the same
machine.

virt-v2v has a new I<--password-file> option to allow you to securely
pass in a password, and to avoid an interactive prompt.

virt-v2v disables Windows autoreboot, making debugging conversion
failures on Windows easier.

virt-v2v now comes with an extensive external test suite.
See L<virt-v2v-test-harness(1)>.

virt-v2v allows virtio drivers to come from any location (Roman
Kagan), and drivers can be read directly from the virtio ISO.

virt-v2v supports conversion of Windows E<ge> 8.  Note this is
experimental, and possibly broken.  Use with caution.

virt-v2v can now convert UEFI guests.

L<virt-p2v(1)> adds a network configuration dialog.

virt-p2v now has C<p2v.pre>, C<p2v.post> and C<p2v.fail> triggers,
allowing arbitrary scripts for preparing the host for conversion and
tidying up post-conversion.

virt-p2v now uses the more advanced metacity window manager
(instead of matchbox).

L<virt-sysprep(1)> will remove C</var/spool/mail/username> for
non-root accounts (Hu Tao).

L<virt-customize(1)>, L<virt-builder(1)> and virt-sysprep have the
following new options:

=over 4

=item I<--commands-from-file>

allow long lists of commands to be read from a file instead of from
the command line (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--copy>

copy files inside the guest (Maros Zatko)

=item I<--copy-in>

copy host files recursively into the guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--move>

move files inside the guest (Maros Zatko)

=item I<--ssh-inject>

inject SSH keys into a guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--sm-attach>

=item I<--sm-credentials>

=item I<--sm-register>

=item I<--sm-remove>

=item I<--sm-unregister>

register and unregister a guest from subscription-manager
(Pino Toscano)

=item I<--touch>

touch a file in the guest (Pino Toscano)

=item I<--truncate>

=item I<--truncate-recursive>

truncate files (Maros Zatko)

=back

Improvements to virt-customize firstboot support.  In particular,
Windows firstboot should work as well as Linux (Roman Kagan).

L<virt-df(1)> can now use PolicyKit, SASL and other authentication
methods when getting the list of domains from libvirt.

Improvements to guestfish bash completion (Pino Toscano).

Bash completion now completes short options as well as long options
(Pino Toscano).

L<guestfish(1)> now displays a command synopsis if the number of
parameters given to a command is wrong (Hu Tao).

virt-builder now supports Red Hat Enterprise Linux versions back to RHEL 3.

virt-builder supports SUSE guests using zypper (Cédric Bosdonnat).

=head3 Language bindings

The Java bindings now include validated Javadoc, and other improvements
(Pino Toscano).

Multiple fixes and improvements to the PHP bindings (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Inspection

Inspection can now get icons from RHEL 7 and CentOS 7.

F</etc/favicon.png> is now allowed to be a symbolic link.

For RPM-based guests, inspection now returns RPM Epoch fields.

Debian packages now have separate Epoch and Version fields
(Nikos Skalkotos).

OpenBSD detection added, FreeBSD and NetBSD added as separate
"distros", and other BSD inspection improvements and bug fixes
(Nikos Skalkotos).

CoreOS detection added (Nikos Skalkotos).

The package manager in Fedora E<ge> 22 is C<dnf>.

ReactOS guests can be inspected (Maros Zatko).

Add support for UEFI guests.

Inspection now works when kernel modules are gzip or xz compressed
(Pino Toscano).

Inspection now recognizes ppc64 and ppc64le guests (Maros Zatko).

Inspection lists the installed applications on Archlinux guests
(Nikos Skalkotos).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

PPC64 (POWER7) and PPC64LE (POWER8) architectures are now much better
supported, and should work out of the box.

For aarch64, we use AAVMF (an open source UEFI implementation based on
OVMF) if available to run the appliance.

For armv7, we now use the I<-M virt> machine type by default.

There is better support for compiling on non-Linux platforms
(Pino Toscano, Margaret Lewicka).

Libguestfs should now work on MIPS 32 bit little endian ("mipsel").  I
have not been able to try 64 bit or big endian.

=head2 Security

=over 4

=item CVE-2014-8484

=item CVE-2014-8485

Libguestfs previously ran the L<strings(1)> utility on untrusted
files.  Strings could parse BFD headers in an unsafe way, leading to
possible arbitrary code execution.  Libguestfs now runs strings with a
flag to ensure it does not try to parse BFD headers.  This could have
led to exploitation of the libguestfs appliance, but since libguestfs
further constrains the appliance through virtualization, SELinux and
other techniques, it was unlikely to have caused any privilege
escalation on the host.

=item XPath injection in virt-v2v

One possible XPath injection vulnerability was fixed in virt-v2v.
This might have allowed a malicious guest which was being converted by
virt-v2v to construct an arbitrary XPath expression which would have
been evaluated on the host (by the libxml2 library linked to the
virt-v2v binary).  It is not clear what the effects of this might be.

For further information, see upstream commit
L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/commit/6c6ce85f94c36803fe2db35a98db436bff0c14b0>

=item Denial of service problems when using C<qemu-img info>

When using the American Fuzzy Lop fuzzer (C<afl-fuzz>) on the
C<qemu-img info> command, Richard W.M. Jones found that certain files
can cause the C<qemu-img> program to use lots of memory and time (for
example 6GB of heap and 14 seconds of CPU time on a fast Intel
processor), and in some cases to crash.  Since libguestfs may run
C<qemu-img info> on disk images to find out what they contain, this
transitively could cause libguestfs to hang or consume lots of memory.

Libguestfs was modified so that it uses resource limits to limit the
space and time used by C<qemu-img info>, to avoid this problem.  If a
malicious user tries to pass one of these disk images to libguestfs,
C<qemu-img> will crash and the crash is reported back to libguestfs
callers as an error message.




=back

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

=over 4

=item C<guestfs_add_libvirt_dom>

This exposes a previously private API that allows you to pass a
C<virDomainPtr> object directly from libvirt to libguestfs.

=item C<guestfs_blockdev_setra>

Adjust readahead parameter for devices.
See C<blockdev --setra> command.

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_cancel>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_pause>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_resume>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_balance_status>

Balance support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_filesystem_defragment>

Filesystem defragmentation support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_image>

Create an image of a Btrfs filesystem (Chen Hanxiao)

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_assign>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_create>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_destroy>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_limit>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_remove>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_qgroup_show>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_quota_enable>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_quota_rescan>

Quote support for Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_rescue_chunk_recover>

Scan and recover the chunk tree in Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_rescue_super_recover>

Restore superblocks in Btrfs filesystems (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_replace>

Replace a device in a Btrfs filesystem (Cao Jin).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_cancel>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_resume>

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_scrub_status>

Scrub a Btrfs filesystem (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_get_default>

Get the default subvolume of a Btrfs filesystem (Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_show>

List detailed information about the subvolume of a Btrfs filesystem
(Hu Tao).

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_enable_extended_inode_refs>

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_enable_skinny_metadata_extent_refs>

=item C<guestfs_btrfstune_seeding>

Various tuning parameters for Btrfs filesystems (Chen Hanxiao).

=item C<guestfs_c_pointer>

Return the C pointer to the underlying C<guestfs_h *>.  This allows
interworking of libguestfs bindings with bindings from other
libraries.  For further information see
L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1075164>

=item C<guestfs_copy_in>

=item C<guestfs_copy_out>

Flexible APIs for recursively copying directories of files between the
host and guest filesystem.  Previously these were available only as
guestfish commands, but now any API users can call them (Pino Toscano).

=item C<guestfs_part_get_gpt_guid>

=item C<guestfs_part_set_gpt_guid>

Get and set the GPT per-partition GUID.

=item C<guestfs_part_get_mbr_part_type>

Get MBR partition type (Chen Hanxiao).

=item C<guestfs_set_uuid_random>

Set the UUID of a filesystem to a randomly generated value; supported
filesystems currently are ext2/3/4, XFS, Btrfs, and swap partitions.
(Chen Hanxiao).

=back

=head3 Other API changes

C<guestfs_disk_create> can now use VMDK files as backing files.

C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_snapshot> takes extra optional
parameters (all added by Hu Tao):

=over 4

=item C<ro>

for creating a read-only Btrfs snapshot

=item C<qgroupid>

for adding the snapshot to a qgroup

=back

C<guestfs_btrfs_subvolume_create> can also take the optional
C<qgroupid> parameter (Hu Tao).

C<guestfs_set_uuid> can set UUID of swap partitions, Btrfs
(Hu Tao, Chen Hanxiao).

C<guestfs_copy_device_to_file> and C<guestfs_copy_file_to_file> have a
new optional C<append> parameter, allowing you to append to the output
file instead of truncating it.

C<guestfs_mkfs> has a new optional C<label> parameter to set the
initial label of the new filesystem (Pino Toscano).

C<guestfs_set_label> and C<guestfs_set_uuid> now set C<ENOTSUP> as errno
when there is no implemented support for the filesystem of the specified
mountable (Chen Hanxiao).

Environment variables now let you write C<LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG=true>,
C<LIBGUESTFS_DEBUG=0> and so on.

All C<guestfs_sfdisk*> APIs have been deprecated.  Because
L<sfdisk(8)> was rewritten, incompatibly, upstream, we don't recommend
using these APIs in future code.  Use the C<guestfs_part*> APIs as
replacements.

APIs such as C<guestfs_download> do not truncate F</dev/stdout> or
F</dev/stderr> when writing to them, meaning that if you redirect
stdout or stderr to a file, the file is no longer truncated.





=head2 Build changes

The daemon no longer uses its own separate copy of gnulib.  Instead it
shares a single copy with the library.

OCaml F<.annot> files are now created, so IDEs and editors like emacs
and vi can browse OCaml types in the source code.

Various fixes to allow different host/appliance architecture builds
(Pino Toscano).

Automake is now used directly to build all the OCaml programs, instead
of ad hoc Makefile rules.  One side effect of this is to enable
warnings in all the C code used by OCaml programs.

C<-fno-strict-overflow> is used throughout the build to avoid dubious
GCC optimizations.

Multiple cleanups to support GCC 5.

OCaml OUnit2 is needed to run some OCaml tests.

Creating a statically linked F<libguestfs.a> should work again.

The F<src/api-support> subdirectory and its scripts are no longer
used.  Instead we store in the F<generator/actions.ml> when the API
was added to libguestfs.

=head2 Internationalization

The translation service has changed from Transifex to Zanata.

Many more translations are available now, for both library and tools
messages and documentation.

=head2 Internals

In all OCaml tools, there are now common C<error>, C<warning>, C<info>
functions, and common way to set and get the I<--quiet>, I<-x> (trace)
and I<-v> (verbose) flags, and colour highlighting used consistently.

C<COMPILE_REGEXP> macros are used to simplify PCRE constructors and
destructors.

In the generator, C<Pointer> arguments have finally been implemented.

Internal identifiers no longer use double and triple underscores
(eg. C<guestfs___program_name>).  These identifiers are invalid for
C99 and C++ programs, although compilers would accept them.

The daemon no longer parses C<guestfs_*> options from
F</proc/cmdline>.  Instead it only takes ordinary command line
options.  The appliance init script turns F</proc/cmdline> into daemon
command line options.

The tests can now run the daemon as a "captive process", allowing it
to be run directly on the host.  The main advantage of this is we can
run valgrind directly on the daemon during testing.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh 1.28.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1239053>

virt-v2v error reporting when grub.conf cannot be parsed by Augeas

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1238053>

v2v:Duplicate disk target set when convert guest with cdrom attached

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1237869>

Virtio drivers are not installed for windows 2008 guests by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1234351>

virt-v2v Support for Fedora virtio-win drivers

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1232192>

Virt-v2v gives an error on a blank disk: part_get_parttype: unknown signature, of the output: BYT;

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229385>

virt-p2v in kernel command line mode should power off the machine after conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229340>

virt-p2v no GUI mode appends \n to the final command line parameter

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1229305>

virt-sysprep at cleanup deletes /var/spool/at/.SEQ which results in failing at

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1226794>

"Doing conversion……" still shows after cancel the conversion from virt-p2v client

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1215042>

Memory leak in virNetSocketNewConnectUNIX

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1213324>

virt-v2v: warning: unknown guest operating system: windows windows 6.3 when converting win8,win8.1,win2012,win2012R2 to rhev

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1213247>

virt tools should print the same format of version string

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212808>

RFE: virt-builder --touch

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212807>

virt-builder --selinux-relabel flag fails on cross-architecture builds

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212680>

RFE: virt-inspector xpath query should output a neat format of the query element

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1212152>

virt-builder firstboot-command fails: File name too long

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1211996>

virt-inspector gives incorrect arch (ppc64) for ppc64le guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1203817>

RFE: virt-customize --move and --copy

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1201526>

index-parser can't parse systemd mount files properly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1196101>

virt-builder --upload option doesn't work to a FAT partition

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1196100>

virt-builder -x option on its own does not enable tracing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1195204>

`virt-builder` should create $HOME/.cache directory if it already doesn't exist

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1193237>

Virt-builder fingerprint is required even when no check desired

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1189284>

virt-resize should preserve GPT partition UUIDs, else EFI guests become unbootable

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1188866>

Performance regression in virt-builder when uncompressing image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1186800>

virt-v2v should support gzip format ova as input

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1185561>

virt-sparsify should ignore read-only LVs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1182463>

"mknod-b", "mknod-c", and "mkfifo" do not strip non-permissions bits from "mode"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1176493>

virt-v2v ignores sound device when convert xen guest to local kvm

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175676>

Typo error in 'help ping-daemon'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175196>

"parse-environment" and "parse-environment-list" fail to parse "LIBGUESTFS_TRACE = 0"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1175035>

"is-blockdev"/"is-blockdev-opts" fail to detect "/dev/sda"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174280>

RFE: Allow v2v conversion of Oracle Linux 5.8 VMware VM

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174200>

New virt-v2v failure: CURL: Error opening file: NSS: client certificate not found (nickname not specified): Invalid argument

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174123>

Graphics password disappear after conversion of virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1174073>

The listen address for vnc is changed after conversion by virt-v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1171666>

inspection thinks EFI partition is a separate operating system

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1171130>

virt-v2v conversion of RHEL 3 guest fails with: All of your loopback devices are in use

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1170685>

Conversion of RHEL 4 guest fails: rpm -ql 1:kernel-utils-2.4-23.el4: virt-v2v: error: libguestfs error: command_lines:

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1170073>

virt-v2v picks debug kernels over non-debug kernels when versions are equal

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1169045>

virt-sparsify: libguestfs error: qemu-img info: 'virtual-size' is not representable as a 64 bit integer

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1169015>

virt-resize --expand fails on ubuntu-14.04.img image (regression)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1168144>

warning: fstrim: fstrim: /sysroot/: FITRIM ioctl failed: Operation not supported (ignored) when convert win2003 guest from xen server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167921>

p2v: No Network Connection dialog

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167774>

virt-p2v fails with error:"nbd.c:nbd_receive_negotiate():L501: read failed"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167623>

Remove "If reporting bugs, run virt-v2v with debugging enabled .." message when running virt-p2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167601>

"Conversion was successful" pop out even virt-p2v fails

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1167302>

virt-v2v: warning: ova hard disk has no parent controller when convert from a ova file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1166618>

virt-resize should give out the detail warning info to let customers know what's going wrong

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165975>

File "/boot/grub2/device.map" showing is not right after converting a rhel7 guest from esx server

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165785>

mount-loop command fails: mount failed: Unknown error -1

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165569>

Disable "cancel conversion" button after virt-p2v conversion finished

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1165564>

Provide Reboot/Shutdown button after virt-p2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164853>

Booting in qemu found no volume groups and failed checking the filesystems

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164732>

The description of 'help append' is not accurately, it add the kernel options to libguestfs appliance not the guest kernel

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164697>

typo errors in man pages

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1164619>

Inspect-get-icon failed on RHEL7 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1162966>

xfs should also give a warning out to let customer know the limitation

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1161575>

Failed to import guest with "rtl8139" nic  to openstack server after converted by v2v

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159651>

virt-sysprep firstboot script is not deleted if it reboot a RHEL 7 guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159258>

esx win2008 32 bit guest fail to load after conversion because the firmware isn't ACPI compatible

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1159016>

libvirt backend does not set RBD password

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1158526>

Use password file instead of process interaction

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1157679>

virt-p2v-make-disk should add firmwares

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1156449>

libguestfs FTBFS on f21 ppc64le

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1156301>

virt-inspector support adding a remote disk, but in its man page -a URI / --add URI is missing

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1155121>

Virt-v2v will fail when using relative path for -i ova

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1153844>

Redundancy whitespace at the end of directory name when use <TAB> to complete the directory name in guestfish with a xfs filesystem in guest

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1153589>

virt-v2v will hang when converting esx guest before disk copy phase

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1152998>

virt-v2v / qemu-img fails on ova image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151910>

virt-ls should remove '/' in the output when specify the directory name as /etc/

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151900>

Should also add a field for directory files when run virt-ls with --csv option

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1151033>

virt-v2v conversions from VMware vCenter server run slowly

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146832>

virt-v2v fail to convert guest with disk type volume

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1146007>

Input/output error during conversion of esx guest.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1135585>

[RFE] virt-builder should support copying in a directory/list of files

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1089566>

[abrt] livecd-tools: kickstart.py:276:apply:IOError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: '/run/media/jones/2tp001data/createlive/temp/imgcreate-_dX8Us/install_root/etc/rpm/macros.imgcreate'

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1079625>

virt-sparsify fails if a btrfs filesystem contains readonly snapshots

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1075164>

RFE: allow passing in a pre-opened libvirt connection from python

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/912499>

Security context on image file gets reset

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/889082>

[RFE] virt-v2v should check whether guest with same name exist on target first then transfer the disk

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/855059>

RFE: virt-p2v: display more information about network devices such as topology, bonding, etc.

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/823758>

p2v client should have largest number restrictions for CPU and Memory settings

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/709327>

hivex cannot read registry hives from ReactOS

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/709326>

virt-inspector cannot detect ReactOS

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/119673>

installation via NFS doesn't seem to work

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHOR

Richard W.M. Jones

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
