=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.54

These are the release notes for libguestfs stable release 1.54.
This describes the major changes since 1.52.

Libguestfs 1.54.0 was released on B<8 October 2024>.

=begin comment

=head2 Language bindings

=end comment

=head2 Inspection

Add detection of Circle Linux (Bella Zhang).

Add support for LoongArch (liuxiang).

Add detection of Kylin (grass-lu).

Add detection of openEuler (Wang Guoquan).

C<PARTUUID> and C<PARTLABEL> are now resolved in guest F</etc/fstab>.

=head2 API

B<New APIs> C<findfs_partuuid> and C<findfs_partlabel>.  These can be
used to efficiently look up a filesystem by its GPT partition UUID or
label.

Support for the following inactive or infrequently used device
types has been B<removed>: Gluster, Sheepdog, TFTP.

Add GOST R34.11-94 message digest algorithm to checksum APIs (Alexey
Shabalin).

Allow C<nbd+unix://> URIs (NBD over Unix domain socket) in guestfish
and other places.

Various C<part_*> (partition) APIs related to GPT have been
reimplemented to use util-linux sfdisk instead of sgdisk.  Util-linux
is more widely available, so this reduces dependencies in the common
case.  One optional API remains that still uses sgdisk.  (Thanks
Yongkui Guo).

Add C<cipher> suboption to C<cryptsetup_open>
(Jonatan Pålsson).

Because of a bug, the C<part_get_gpt_attributes> API could truncate
the return value from 64 to 32 bits.  This has been fixed.

=begin comment

=head2 Tools

=end comment

=head2 Build changes

Fix btrfs compatibility with kernel changes in Linux 6.7.

Removed some compatibility code for versions of util-linux (sfdisk)
prior to 2014.

Pass CFLAGS through when building the Perl bindings.  In particular
this means that I<-g> should be passed through correctly, enabling
debugging symbols.

Fix build on macOS (Antonio Caggiano).

=head2 Internals

Libguestfs will now no longer recommend using
C<LIBGUESTFS_BACKEND=direct>.  This was shown previously when libvirt
failed to start the appliance.  However it is felt that this now does
more harm than good.

Fix generation of virt-customize I<--chown> parameter (Yongkui Guo).

In the appliance, reduce boot time when dhcp isn't needed (Olaf
Hering).

A deadlock in the appliance caused by a regression in Linux 6.11 has
been worked around.  The deadlock was also fixed in Linux 6.12.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.52.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2303267>

Rare hangs while starting the appliance, at 'echo noop' into /sys/block/{h,s,ub,v}d*/queue/scheduler

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-35998>

Drop dependency from libguestfs -> gdisk

=item L<https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-46596>

libguestfs inspection does not know about /etc/fstab PARTLABEL=<label>

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/136>

1.52.0: btrfs related c_api/tests are failing (unable to create quota
group: Invalid argument)

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/138>

Python how-to incorrect exception name

=item L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs/issues/145>

 1.52.1: Rust test 410_close_event fails

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.52.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Alexey Shabalin

=item Andi Chandler

=item Antonio Caggiano

=item Bella Zhang

=item grass-lu

=item Jonatan Pålsson

=item Jürgen Hötzel

=item liuxiang

=item Olaf Hering

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Wang Guoquan

=item Yuri Chornoivan

=item zhanchun li

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2024 Red Hat Inc.
