=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.42

Please note that virt-v2v, virt-p2v and the boot analysis tools were
moved out of the libguestfs package / repository into separate
projects.  See:

=over 4

=item *

L<https://github.com/libguestfs/virt-v2v>

=item *

L<https://github.com/libguestfs/virt-p2v>

=item *

L<https://github.com/libguestfs/libguestfs-analysis-tools>

=back

Those projects are now on a separate release cycle.  Release notes are
published separately.

=head2 New features

Add support for the Vala language (Corentin Noël).

Add support for the Rust language
(Hiroyuki Katsura, sponsored by Google Summer of Code).

Reproducible builds (Chris Lamb).

Advanced Format disks (which use 4K sectors) can now be processed by
libguestfs.  Use the new optional C<blocksize> parameter to
C<guestfs_add_drive_opts>, and the I<--blocksize> option added to
several tools (Nikolay Ivanets).

Windows CompactOS (NTFS file compression) is now supported.

=head3 New features in existing tools

Advanced machine readable output in various virt tools now supports
JSON output, and writing logs to a numbered file descriptor (Pino
Toscano).

virt-filesystems tool now more accurately reports filesystem total
size, in the case where for example the filesystem does not occupy the
whole of its containing device (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Language bindings

Python E<ge> 2.7 is required.

Python bindings are now more extensively tested
(Hiroyuki Katsura).

Python bindings should now work with Python E<ge> 3.8.

Multiple fixes to avoid crashes in the Python bindings
(Sam Eiderman).

OCaml bindings are compiled with C<-DCAML_NAME_SPACE>
to ensure no non-caml_-namespaced symbols are used
(Pino Toscano).

OCaml bindings should now work with OCaml 4.09 and 4.10.

Erlang has deprecated the old C<erl_interface> library
which we use for Erlang bindings.  It will be removed in
OTP 22, which will permanently break Erlang support unless
someone steps forward to update the Erlang bindings in
libguestfs.

Fix compatibility with newer cgo for Go bindings
(Tomáš Golembiovský).

Go API error handling is now more idiomatic (Csaba Henk).

Update documentation about how to handle boolean parameters in Ruby
bindings (Csaba Henk).

=head3 Inspection

Libguestfs can now extract icons for Gentoo, newer SUSE and
OpenMandriva guests.  Improved extraction of RHEL icons.
(Pino Toscano).

Inspection returns the osinfo IDs of newer Windows versions,
and rolling Linux distros (Pino Toscano).

OpenMandriva is now detected (Bernhard Rosenkränzer).

Arch Linux detection improvements (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Architectures and platforms

Libguestfs can now be compiled on OpenMandriva (Bernhard Rosenkränzer).

Ubuntu fix for enabling network support (Ioanna Alifieraki).

=head3 Other

Use of deprecated libguestfs APIs will now cause compiler deprecation
warnings by default, whereas previously you have to enable these
warnings.  To turn off these warnings use
C<-DGUESTFS_NO_WARN_DEPRECATED=1>.  A new feature is that you can now
disable deprecated APIs completely if you want, using
C<-DGUESTFS_NO_DEPRECATED=1> (Pino Toscano).

Fix hostname in virt-builder templates (Pino Toscano).

The single large release notes file is now split into multiple
documents organized by version.

The C<--key> option of several tools was broken, especially if you
tried to use the option to pass multiple keys.  This has been
fixed and a regression test added.

Augeas exceptions occurring in daemon (eg. during inspection) will now
produced detailed errors (Pino Toscano).

=head2 Security

No security issues were found in this release.

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

C<luks_uuid> returns the UUID of a LUKS device (Pino Toscano).

=head3 Other API changes

Cope with new output from the C<btrfs scrub> command.  There
is no visible change at the API level.

New optional parameter C<blocksize> added to C<guestfs_add_drive_opts>
to support Advanced Format disks (Nikolay Ivanets).

=head2 Build changes

Minimum version of Augeas required is 1.2.0 (Pino Toscano).

C<common/> subdirectory is now a git submodule shared with
the virt-v2v project.

Supermin E<ge> 5.1.18 is required.

There were several bugs in libvirt 5.10.0 and 6.0 which affected
libguestfs.  It is highly advisable to use libvirt 6.1 where these
bugs are fixed (versions of libvirt E<lt> 5.10.0 are also fine).

Many gnulib modules which we were not using or which we
used in only a few places have been removed (Pino Toscano).

Multiple fixes for builddir != sourcedir builds (Pino Toscano).

A new C<bundled/> subdirectory contains one bundled
library that we currently use, C<ocaml-augeas>
(Pino Toscano).

Fix compatibility issues when being compiled with GCC 10.

=head2 Internals

When linking OCaml programs, automake silent rules and the C<V=1> flag
are both now obeyed (Pino Toscano).

The C<guestfs_device_index> API was reimplemented in library code
instead of in the daemon.  There should be no observable effect of
this change.

Since Linux 5.6 enumerates C</dev/sdX> devices in parallel, libguestfs
was changed to map API device names to appliance device names, and
then do the reverse mapping when returning names from the appliance.
Hopefully this should have no observable effect, but can produce
somewhat confusing debugging messages since device names in the debug
might not match device names passed in to APIs.  Furthermore the
C<root=UUID=...> option is always passed to the appliance (instead of
naming the device containing the root filesystem).

We expect to move from the Zanata service to the Weblate service for
translated strings.  For more information see
L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1787301>

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.40.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1773520>

Segfault in python bindings for guestfs_int_py_event_callback_wrapper

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1746699>

Can't import guest from export domain to data domain on rhv4.3 due to error "Invalid parameter: 'DiskType=1'"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1733168>

virt-v2v: Use scp -T in -i vmx -it ssh mode

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1723305>

Delete info"export PATH=/path/to/nbdkit-1.1.x:$PATH" in virt-v2v-input-vmware manual page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1705482>

python 3.8 requires using -embed variant of pkgconf file, causing libguestfs to fail to build Python 3.8 bindings

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1703463>

libguestfs cannot inspect disks using WIndows 10 NTFS compression, error "unsupported reparse point"

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1694268>

[PATCH] Add OpenMandriva support

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1691659>

virt-v2v should show a message when qemu-guest-agent is installed in guest successfully during conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1690574>

virt-v2v fails to import a guest while cannot find `file_architecture` for a file

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1680361>

[v2v][RHV][Scale] v2v Migration to RHV failed on timed out waiting for transfer to finalize

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1661871>

python bindings wrongly using str for APIs with RBufferOut/FBuffer on Python 3

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1626503>

Unable to maintain static IP address configuration post VM migration

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1612653>

Guest has no disk after rhv-upload converting if target data domain has similar name with other data domain on rhv4.2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1605242>

Update nbdkit info for vddk in v2v man page

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1584678>

On W2K12r2 rhev-apt does not run non-interactively, causing race when starting rhev-apt service from the command line

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1518539>

Macvtap network will be lost during v2v conversion

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1351000>

virt-customize --commands-from-file will fail if there is an extra blank in the file

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

Ioanna Alifieraki

Sam Eiderman

Tomáš Golembiovský

Csaba Henk

Nikolay Ivanets

Richard W.M. Jones

Hiroyuki Katsura

Chris Lamb

Corentin Noël

Bernhard Rosenkränzer

Pino Toscano

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
