=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.52

These are the release notes for libguestfs stable release 1.52.
This describes the major changes since 1.50.

Libguestfs 1.52.0 was released on B<XXX XXX 2024>.

=head2 Language bindings

The Python bindings now use C<bytes> (instead of C<str>) for the event
callback message, since it may contain arbitrary 8 bit data (thanks
Yonatan Shtarkman).

Also in the Python bindings, fix a rare crash, and avoid memory leaks
in event callbacks (thanks Yonatan Shtarkman, Laszlo Ersek, Eric
Blake).

Support for OCaml 5, and OCaml E<ge> 4.07 is now the minimum (thanks
Guillaume Munch-Maccagnoni, Jerry James, Josh Berdine, Jürgen Hötzel,
Vincent Laviron).

The OCaml bindings now release the runtime lock around calls to
C<guestfs_close>, since that call might be long-running (for example
it might have to shut down the appliance and synch disks).

=head2 Inspection

Support OpencloudOS (cunshunxia@tencent).

=head2 API

SELinux relabelling now runs in parallel, meaning it's a lot quicker
(Andrey Drobyshev).

Add support for lzma and zstd compression methods in tar APIs (like
C<guestfs_tar_in>) (Zixun LI).

C<guestfs_pvs_full> previously didn't always return the correct device
names.  This has now been fixed.

C<guestfs_btrfs_filesystem_balance> fixed so it now works with more
modern btrfs tools (Jürgen Hötzel).

=head2 Tools

The L<guestfish(1)> I<--key> option now recognizes LVM names like
F</dev/mapper/rhel_bootp--73--75--123-root> (Laszlo Ersek).

guestfish I<--key> option also supports a new S<I<--key all:...>>
selector to try the same key on all devices.

In L<guestmount(1)> avoid calling C<fclose(NULL)> on error paths,
which might have caused a crash on some platforms.

=head2 Build changes

The C<RELEASES> file (which listed release dates) has been removed and
replaced with a simple C<RELEASE_DATE> macro in F<./configure>.  This
should simplify builds.

Optionally L<passt(1)> may be used for networking (Laszlo Ersek).

L<dhcpcd(8)> is now used in preference to dh-client on Red Hat
platforms.

Old Ruby C<MiniTest> and C<Test::Unit> dependencies replaced with new
C<Minitest>.

Fix compatibility issues with libxml2 2.12.

=head2 Internals

On x86-64 we now use the more modern q35 machine type when running the
appliance.  This should perform slightly better and has more
development attention from the qemu community.  The change should be
invisible to libguestfs users.

Fix a segmentation fault when C<TERM> environment variable was set to
C<dumb> (Daisuke HATAYAMA).

Avoid a warning on modern Fedora which does not have F</selinux>
(Andrey Drobyshev).

Fix build on OpenSUSE LEAP 15 or other distros with a L<file(1)>
command which did not understand the I<-S> option (thanks Olaf
Hering).

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.50.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2247057>

Remove dependency on dhcp-client in libguestfs

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2184967>

RFE: support passt for appliance networking, as QEMU userspace
networking backend

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2168578>

use q35 machine type for libguestfs appliance

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1910039>

virt-dib doesn't work with newer diskimage-builder version on RHEL8

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.50.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Andrey Drobyshev

=item cunshunxia

=item Emilio Herrera

=item grimst

=item Jan Kuparinen

=item Juergen Hoetzel

=item Jürgen Hötzel

=item Laszlo Ersek

=item Pavel Borecki

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Temuri Doghonadze

=item Tian Shixiong

=item Yuri Chornoivan

=item Zixun LI

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2024 Red Hat Inc.
