=begin comment

We break with tradition here and don’t use ALL CAPS for the section
headings, as this makes them much easier to read.

=end comment

=head1 NAME

guestfs-recipes - libguestfs, guestfish and virt tools recipes

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This page contains recipes for and links to things you can do using
libguestfs, L<guestfish(1)> and the virt tools.

=head1 Access a remote disk image using guestfish

If the disk image is on a remote server which is accessible using SSH,
HTTP, FTP, NBD, iSCSI, or similar, then you can open it directly.  See
L<guestfish(1)/ADDING REMOTE STORAGE> for several examples.  This
requires libguestfs E<ge> 1.22 and qemu E<ge> 1.5.

=head1 Audit a virtual machine for setuid files

See: L<virt-ls(1)/EXAMPLES>.

=head1 Audit a virtual machine for vulnerabilities and security problems

See:
L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2013/05/16/scanning-offline-guests-using-openscap-and-guestmount/#content>

=head1 Change the background image in a Windows XP VM

The links below explain how to use L<guestfish(1)> to change the
background image for a user of a Windows XP VM.  Unfortunately the
technique appears to be substantially different for each version of
Windows.

L<https://lists.fedoraproject.org/pipermail/virt/2011-May/002655.html>
L<https://lists.fedoraproject.org/pipermail/virt/2011-May/002658.html>

=head1 Checksum a file or device within a disk image

To checksum a whole device, or a partition, LV etc within a disk image:

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img run : checksum-device md5 /dev/sda1

Replace C<md5> with the type of checksum you want.  See
L<guestfs(3)/guestfs_checksum_device> for a list of supported types.

F</dev/sda1> means "the first partition".  You could use F</dev/sda>
to checksum the whole disk image, or the name of a logical volume or
RAID device.

To checksum a single file:

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img -i checksum sha256 /etc/passwd

or for a Windows guest:

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img -i \
   checksum sha256 'win:\windows\system32\config\SOFTWARE'

=head1 Cloning a virtual machine

Use a combination of tools like L<cp(1)>, L<dd(1)>, and
virt tools like L<virt-sysprep(1)>, L<virt-sparsify(1)>
and L<virt-resize(1)>.

For more details, see: L<virt-sysprep(1)/COPYING AND CLONING>.

=head1 Convert a CD-ROM / DVD / ISO to a tarball

This converts input F<cd.iso> to output F<cd.tar.gz>:

 guestfish --ro -a cd.iso -m /dev/sda tgz-out / cd.tar.gz

To export just a subdirectory, eg. F</files>, do:

 guestfish --ro -a cd.iso -m /dev/sda tgz-out /files cd.tar.gz

=head1 Convert from one format/filesystem to another

If you have a data disk in one format / filesystem / partition /
volume manager, you can convert it another using this technique.

In this example, we start with a data disk that has a single partition
containing a filesystem, and we want to create another disk that
contains the same files but on an ext3 filesystem embedded in a
logical volume on a sparse raw-format disk.

First create the formatted-but-empty target disk:

 truncate -s 10G target.img
 virt-format -a target.img --partition=mbr --lvm --filesystem=ext3

Now, pipe two guestfish instances together to transfer the old data to
the new disk:

 guestfish --ro -a source.img -m /dev/sda1  -- tar-out / - | \
 guestfish --rw -a target.img -m /dev/VG/LV -- tar-in - /

To browse the final disk image, do:

 guestfish --ro -a target.img -m /dev/VG/LV
 ><fs> ll /

This technique is quite powerful, allowing you for example to split up
source directories over the target filesystems.

Note this won’t work (at least, not directly) for bootable virtual
machine disks because it doesn't copy over the boot loader.

=head1 Convert Windows DVD to bootable USB key

L<http://rwmj.wordpress.com/2013/05/09/tip-convert-a-windows-dvd-iso-to-a-bootable-usb-key-using-guestfish/#content>

=head1 Convert Xen-style partitionless image to partitioned disk image

Xen disk images are often partitionless, meaning that the filesystem
starts directly at the beginning of the disk with no partition table.
You can in fact use these directly in KVM (provided the guest isn't
Windows), but some people like to convert them to regular partitioned
disk images, and this is required for Windows guests.  Here is how to
use guestfish to do this:

 guestfish
 ><fs> add-ro input.img
 ><fs> sparse output.img 10G     # adjust the output size
 ><fs> run
 # Create a partition table on the output disk:
 ><fs> part-init /dev/sdb mbr
 ><fs> part-add /dev/sdb p 2048 -2048
 # Copy the data to the target partition:
 ><fs> copy-device-to-device /dev/sda /dev/sdb1 sparse:true
 # Optionally resize the target filesystem.  Use ntfsresize
 # for Windows guests:
 ><fs> resize2fs /dev/sdb1

Such a disk image won’t be directly bootable.  You may need to boot it
with an external kernel and initramfs (see below).  Or you can use the
guestfish commands C<syslinux> or C<extlinux> to install a SYSLINUX
bootloader.

=head1 Create empty disk images

The L<virt-format(1)> tool can do this directly.

Use L<virt-make-fs(1)> to create a disk image with content.  This can
also create some standard disk images such as virtual floppy devices
(VFDs).

You can also use the L<guestfish(1)> I<-N> option to create empty disk
images.  The useful guide below explains the options available.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2010/09/08/new-guestfish-n-options-in-1-5-9/#content>

L<virt-builder(1)> can create minimal guests.

=head1 Delete a file (or other simple file operations)

Use guestfish.  To delete a file:

 guestfish -a disk.img -i rm /file/to/delete

To touch a file (bring it up to date or create it):

 guestfish -a disk.img -i touch /file/to/touch

To stat a file.  Since this is a read-only operation, we can make it
safer by adding the I<--ro> flag.

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img -i stat /file/to/stat

There are dozens of these commands.  See L<guestfish(1)> or the output
of C<guestfish -h>

=head1 Diff two guests; compare a snapshot to the current version

Since libguestfs E<ge> 1.26, use L<virt-diff(1)> to look for
differences between two guests (for example if they were originally
cloned from the same source), or between two snapshots from the same
guest.  In earlier versions of libguestfs, use L<virt-ls(1)>.

=head1 Disable a systemd service

The following is the equivalent of C<systemctl mask ...>. To disable
the C<cloud-init> service so it doesn't start at next boot:

 guestfish -a disk.img -i \
     ln-sf /dev/null /etc/systemd/system/cloud-init.service

To disable tmp-on-tmpfs:

 guestfish -a disk.img -i \
     ln-sf /dev/null /etc/systemd/system/tmp.mount

One problem with the commands above is there is no feedback if you get
the name of the service you are trying to mask wrong.  But you can use
L<virt-ls(1)> to list the available systemd services like this:

 virt-ls -a /tmp/fedora-19.img -R /lib/systemd/system

=head1 Drive letters over FUSE

You have a Windows guest, and you want to expose the drive letters as
FUSE mountpoints (F</C/...>, F</D/...> etc).  Instead of
L<guestmount(1)>, use this Perl script:

 #!/usr/bin/perl -w
 use strict;
 use Sys::Guestfs;
 $| = 1;
 die "usage: $0 mountpoint disk.img" if @ARGV < 2;
 my $mp = shift @ARGV;
 my $g = new Sys::Guestfs;
 $g->add_drive_opts ($_) foreach @ARGV;
 $g->launch;
 my @roots = $g->inspect_os;
 die "$0: no operating system found" if @roots != 1;
 my $root = $roots[0];
 die "$0: not Windows" if $g->inspect_get_type ($root) ne "windows";
 my %map = $g->inspect_get_drive_mappings ($root);
 foreach (keys %map) {
     $g->mkmountpoint ("/$_");
     eval { $g->mount ($map{$_}, "/$_") };
     warn "$@ (ignored)\n" if $@;
 }
 $g->mount_local ($mp);
 print "filesystem ready on $mp\n";
 $g->mount_local_run;
 $g->shutdown;

You can use the script like this:

 $ mkdir /tmp/mnt
 $ ./drive-letters.pl /tmp/mnt windows7.img
 filesystem ready on /tmp/mnt

In another window:

 $ cd /tmp/mnt
 $ ls
 C  D
 $ cd C
 $ ls
 Documents and Settings
 PerfLogs
 ProgramData
 Program Files
 [etc]
 $ cd ../..
 $ guestunmount /tmp/mnt

=head1 Dump raw filesystem content from inside a disk image or VM

You can use the L<guestfish(1)> C<download> command to extract the raw
filesystem content from any filesystem in a disk image or a VM (even
one which is encrypted or buried inside an LV or RAID device):

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img run : download /dev/sda1 sda1.img

 guestfish --ro -d Guest run : download /dev/vg_guest/lv_root lv.img

To download to stdout, replace the filename with a C<-> character:

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img run : download /dev/sda1 - | gzip > sda1.gz

To list the filesystems in a disk image, use L<virt-filesystems(1)>.

See also L</Uploading raw filesystem content>.

=head1 Edit grub configuration in a VM

You can use this to:

=over 4

=item *

Fix a virtual machine that does not boot.

=item *

Change which kernel is used to boot the VM.

=item *

Change kernel command line options.

=back

Use L<virt-edit(1)> to edit the grub configuration:

 virt-edit -d BrokenGuest /boot/grub2/grub.cfg

or for general tinkering inside an unbootable VM use L<virt-rescue(1)>
like this:

 virt-rescue -d BrokenGuest

=head1 Export any directory from a VM

To export F</home> from a VM into a local directory use
L<virt-copy-out(1)>:

 virt-copy-out -d Guest /home .

Notes:

=over 4

=item *

The final dot of the command is not a printing error.  It means we
want to copy out to the current directory.

=item *

This creates a directory called C<home> under the current directory.

=back

If the guest is a Windows guest then you can use drive letters and
backslashes, but you must prefix the path with C<win:> and quote it to
protect it from the shell, like this:

 virt-copy-out -d WinGuest 'win:c:\windows\system32\config' .

To get the output as a compressed tarball, do:

 virt-tar-out -d Guest /home - | gzip --best > home.tar.gz

Although it sounds tempting, this is usually not a reliable way to get
a backup from a running guest.  See the entry in the FAQ:
L<http://libguestfs.org/FAQ.html#backup>

=head1 Export external kernel and initramfs (initrd)

If a Linux guest doesn't have a boot loader or it is broken, then you
can usually boot it using an external kernel and initramfs.  In this
configuration, the hypervisor acts like a bootloader, loading the
kernel from the host disk into guest memory and jumping straight into
the kernel.

However you may wonder how to get the right kernel corresponding to
the disk image you have.  Since libguestfs E<ge> 1.24
L<virt-builder(1)> can get the latest kernel and corresponding
initramfs for you:

 mkdir outputdir
 virt-builder --get-kernel disk.img -o outputdir
 ls -lh outputdir

=head1 Find out which user is using the most space

This simple script examines a Linux guest to find out which user is
using the most space in their home directory:

 #!/bin/sh -
 
 set -e
 
 vm="$1"
 dir=/home
 
 eval $(guestfish --ro -d "$vm" -i --listen)
 
 for d in $(guestfish --remote ls "$dir"); do
     echo -n "$dir/$d"
     echo -ne '\t'
     guestfish --remote du "$dir/$d";
 done | sort -nr -k 2
 
 guestfish --remote exit

=head1 Get DHCP address from a VM

The link below explains the many different possible techniques for
getting the last assigned DHCP address of a virtual machine.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2011/03/31/tip-code-for-getting-dhcp-address-from-a-virtual-machine-disk-image/#content>

In the libguestfs source examples directory you will find the latest
version of the F<virt-dhcp-address.c> program.

=head1 Get the operating system product name string

Save the following script into a file called F<product-name.sh>:

 #!/bin/sh -
 set -e
 eval "$(guestfish --ro -d "$1" --i --listen)"
 root="$(guestfish --remote inspect-get-roots)"
 guestfish --remote inspect-get-product-name "$root"
 guestfish --remote exit

Make the script executable and run it on a named guest:

 # product-name.sh RHEL60x64
 Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 6.0 (Santiago)

You can also use an XPath query on the L<virt-inspector(1)> XML using
the C<xpath> command line tool or from your favourite programming
language:

 # virt-inspector RHEL60x64 > xml
 # xpath '//product_name' < xml
 Found 1 nodes:
 -- NODE --
 <product_name>Red Hat Enterprise Linux Server release 6.0 (Santiago)</product_name>

=head1 Get the default boot kernel for a Linux VM

The link below contains a program to print the default boot kernel for
a Linux VM.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2010/10/30/tip-use-augeas-to-get-the-default-boot-kernel-for-a-vm/#content>

It uses Augeas, and the technique is generally applicable for many
different tasks, such as:

=over 4

=item *

listing the user accounts in the guest

=item *

what repositories is it configured to use

=item *

what NTP servers does it connect to

=item *

what were the boot messages last time it booted

=item *

listing who was logged in recently

=back

L<http://augeas.net/>

=head1 Hanging guests

There are various ways to use libguestfs to find out why a guest
is hanging or unresponsive:

=over 4

=item 1.

Read the log files using virt-cat:

 virt-cat Guest /var/log/messages | less

=item 2.

Read the Windows Event Log (Windows Vista or later only):

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2011/04/17/decoding-the-windows-event-log-using-guestfish/#content>

=item 3.

Find out which files were last updated in a guest:

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2012/02/27/using-libguestfs-to-find-out-why-a-windows-guest-was-hanging/#content>

This might give you a clue as to what program is running.

=back

=head1 Hex-dumping sectors from the guest

Hex-dump the boot partition (Master Boot Record / first sector):

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img run : pread-device /dev/sda 0x200 0 |
   hexdump -C

(C<0x200> = 512 bytes which is the size of traditional PC sectors)

To hexdump the N'th partition, substitute a number for C<N> in the
following command:

 guestfish --ro -a disk.img \
     run : pread-device /dev/sda 0x200 $((N*0x200)) |
   hexdump -C

=head1 Hex-editing sectors in the guest

Hex-edit the boot partition (Master Boot Record / first sector):

 guestfish --rw -a disk.img run : hexedit /dev/sda 0x200

=head1 Install packages (RPMs, Debian packages) in a guest

Since libguestfs 1.26, L<virt-builder(1)>, L<virt-customize(1)> and
L<virt-sysprep(1)> have an I<--install> option for installing packages
in Linux guests.  (Use virt-customize if you have an existing guest,
or virt-builder if you want to create a guest from scratch).

For example:

 virt-builder fedora-20 --install emacs

=head1 Install packages from an alternate repository

Since libguestfs 1.26, you can use L<virt-builder(1)>,
L<virt-customize(1)> or L<virt-sysprep(1)> I<--edit> option to edit
repository metadata before installing packages

For example this would install packages from the updates-testing
repository in Fedora:

 virt-builder fedora-20 \
   --edit '/etc/yum.repos.d/fedora-updates-testing.repo:
             s/enabled=0/enabled=1/' \
   --install emacs

=head1 Install SYSLINUX bootloader in a guest

SYSLINUX is a small, easy to configure bootloader for Linux and
Windows guests.  If your guest is not bootable, you can install the
SYSLINUX bootloader using either the guestfish commands C<syslinux>
(for FAT-based guests) or C<extlinux> (for ext2/3/4 and btrfs-based
guests).

This guide assumes a Linux guest where F</dev/sda1> is F</boot>,
F</boot/vmlinuz> is the guest kernel, and F</dev/sda3> is the root
partition.  For a Windows guest you would need a FAT-formatted boot
partition and you would need to use the C<syslinux> command instead.

Create a F<syslinux.cfg> configuration file.  You should check the
SYSLINUX documentation at L<http://www.syslinux.org> but it may look
something like this:

 DEFAULT linux
 LABEL linux
   SAY Booting the kernel
   KERNEL vmlinuz
   INITRD initrd
   APPEND ro root=/dev/sda3

Locate the syslinux master boot record (a file called something like
F</usr/share/syslinux/mbr.bin>).

 guestfish -a disk.img -i
 # Upload the master boot record and configuration file:
 ><fs> upload ..../mbr.bin /boot/mbr.bin
 ><fs> upload ..../syslinux.cfg /boot/syslinux.cfg
 # Put the MBR into the boot sector:
 ><fs> copy-file-to-device /boot/mbr.bin /dev/sda size:440
 # Install syslinux on the first partition:
 ><fs> extlinux /boot
 # Set the first partition as bootable:
 ><fs> part-set-bootable /dev/sda 1 true

See also:
L<http://rwmj.wordpress.com/2013/04/04/new-in-libguestfs-use-syslinux-or-extlinux-to-make-bootable-guests/#content>

=head1 List applications installed in a VM

Save the following to a file F<list-apps.sh>:

 #!/bin/sh -
 set -e
 eval "$(guestfish --ro -d "$1" --i --listen)"
 root="$(guestfish --remote inspect-get-roots)"
 guestfish --remote inspect-list-applications "$root"
 guestfish --remote exit

Make the file executable and then you can run it on any named
virtual machine:

 # list-apps.sh WinGuest
 [0] = {
   app_name: Mozilla Firefox (3.6.12)
   app_display_name: Mozilla Firefox (3.6.12)
   app_epoch: 0
   app_version: 3.6.12 (en-GB)
   app_release:
   app_install_path: C:\Program Files\Mozilla Firefox
   app_trans_path:
   app_publisher: Mozilla
   app_url: http://www.mozilla.com/en-GB/
   app_source_package:
   app_summary:
   app_description: Mozilla Firefox
 }
 [1] = {
   app_name: VLC media player
   app_display_name: VLC media player 1.1.5
   app_epoch: 0
   app_version: 1.1.5
   app_release:
   app_install_path: C:\Program Files\VideoLAN\VLC
   app_trans_path:
   app_publisher: VideoLAN
   app_url: http://www.videolan.org/
   app_source_package:
   app_summary:
   app_description:
 }

If you want to run the script on disk images (instead of libvirt
virtual machines), change C<-d "$1"> to C<-a "$1">.  See also
L<virt-inspector(1)>.

=head1 List files and directories in a VM

Use L<virt-ls(1)>.

=head1 List services in a Windows VM

The link below contains a script that can be used to list out the
services from a Windows VM, and whether those services run at boot
time or are loaded on demand.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2010/12/10/tip-list-services-in-a-windows-guest/#content>

=head1 Make a disk image sparse

Use L<virt-sparsify(1)>.

=head1 Monitor disk usage over time

You can use L<virt-df(1)> to monitor disk usage of your guests over
time.  The link below contains a guide.

L<http://web.archive.org/web/20130214073726/http://virt-tools.org/learning/advanced-virt-df/>

=head1 Reading the Windows Event Log from Windows Vista (or later)

L<guestfish(1)> plus the tools described in the link below can be used
to read out the Windows Event Log from any virtual machine running
Windows Vista or a later version.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2011/04/17/decoding-the-windows-event-log-using-guestfish/#content>

=head1 Remove root password (Linux)

Using the L<virt-edit(1)> I<-e> option you can do simple replacements
on files.  One use is to remove the root password from a Linux guest:

 virt-edit -d domname /etc/passwd -e 's/^root:.*?:/root::/'

 virt-edit -a disk.img /etc/passwd -e 's/^root:.*?:/root::/'

=head1 Remove Administrator password (Windows)

The link below contains one technique for removing the Administrator
password from a Windows VM, or to be more precise, it gives you a
command prompt the next time you log in which you can use to bypass
any security:

L<https://mdbooth.wordpress.com/2010/10/18/resetting-a-windows-guests-administrator-password-with-guestfish/>

=head1 Sysprepping a virtual machine (Windows)

It is possible to do a "sysprep" using libguestfs alone, although not
straightforward.  Currently there is code in the Aeolus Oz project
which does this (using libguestfs).  It is likely we will add this to
L<virt-sysprep(1)> in future.

L<https://github.com/clalancette/oz>
L<https://www.redhat.com/archives/virt-tools-list/2011-May/msg00019.html>

=head1 Unpack a live CD

Linux live CDs often contain multiple layers of disk images wrapped
like a Russian doll.  You can use L<guestfish(1)> to look inside these
multiple layers, as outlined in the guide below.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2009/07/15/unpack-the-russian-doll-of-a-f11-live-cd/#content>

=head1 Uploading and downloading files

The link below contains general tips on uploading (copying in)
and downloading (copying out) files from VMs.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2010/12/02/tip-uploading-and-downloading/#content>

=head1 Uploading raw filesystem content

You can use L<guestfish(1)> to upload whole filesystems into a VM,
even into a filesystem which is encrypted or buried inside an LV or
RAID device:

 guestfish --rw -a disk.img run : upload sda1.img /dev/sda1

 guestfish --rw -d Guest run : upload lv.img /dev/vg_guest/lv_root

One common problem is that the filesystem isn't the right size for the
target.  If it is too large, there’s not much you can do with
libguestfs - you have to prepare the filesystem differently.  But if
the filesystem needs to expand into the target, you can use guestfish
to resize it to the right size:

 guestfish --rw -d Guest run : \
   upload lv.img /dev/vg_guest/lv_root : \
   resize2fs /dev/vg_guest/lv_root

(or use C<ntfsresize> if the filesystem is NTFS).

=head1 Use libguestfs tools on VMware ESX guests

The link below explains how to use libguestfs, L<guestfish(1)> and the
virt tools on any VMware ESX guests, by first sharing the VMware VMFS
over sshfs.

L<https://rwmj.wordpress.com/2011/05/10/tip-use-libguestfs-on-vmware-esx-guests/#content>

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<guestfs-examples(3)>,
L<guestfs-erlang(3)>,
L<guestfs-gobject(3)>,
L<guestfs-golang(3)>,
L<guestfs-java(3)>,
L<guestfs-lua(3)>,
L<guestfs-ocaml(3)>,
L<guestfs-perl(3)>,
L<guestfs-python(3)>,
L<guestfs-ruby(3)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
