=head1 NAME

guestfs-release-notes - libguestfs Release Notes

=head1 RELEASE NOTES FOR LIBGUESTFS 1.46

The big news in this release is that the virt tools like
L<virt-builder(1)>, L<virt-cat(1)>, L<virt-customize(1)>,
L<virt-df(1)>, and many more were moved to a new project.  The
temporary repository for the new guestfs-tools project is here:
L<https://github.com/rwmjones/guestfs-tools> while we set up a
permanent home for it on gitlab.  The tarballs containing the tools
are here: L<https://download.libguestfs.org/guestfs-tools/>

Spinning out all of the tools into a new repository has made
libguestfs a bit easier and simpler to build and manage, and allows us
to focus on just being the API.

Note that the tools L<guestfish(1)> (which is really a "shell API"),
L<guestmount(1)>, L<libguestfs-test-tool(1)> and L<virt-rescue(1)> are
still part of the libguestfs repo.

The not quite so big news is that we have moved away from FreeNode to
Libera Chat for IRC.  The new channel on Libera is called C<#guestfs>
(thanks Daniel Berrangé).

=head2 Language bindings

Libguestfs is now compatible with Go 1.16, and defines a Go module
(thanks Gianfranco Costamagna).

Memory leaks in Python APIs that returned structs are fixed (thanks 朱丹).

Python PyPi code has been relicensed to LGPLv2+ (from GPLv2+).

=head2 Inspection

Inspection of RPM guests now uses librpm instead of trying to parse
the Berkeley DB directly.  Since most RPM-based guests have replaced
BDB with sqlite this allows us to read these newer guests while
retaining compatibility with the older guests (thanks Panu Matilainen).

Inspection of RHEL 8+ with split /usr configuration has been made more
reliable.

Inspection of Windows Server 2022 should now work correctly (Yongkui
Guo).

=head2 API

=head3 New APIs

No new APIs were added in libguestfs 1.46.

=head3 Other API changes

The output of the C<guestfs_cap_get_file> API has changed slightly
because of changes in the underlying libcap.  This isn't strictly
speaking an API break because the new output is a still valid but more
compact description of file capabilities, but because it is different
it may cause problems for users of the API.

The C<guestfs_mkfs_btrfs> API now ignores the C<allocstart> parameter
since it was deprecated by btrfs 4.14.1 and later removed.

C<guestfs_isoinfo_*> APIs now directly parse the CD Primary Volume
Descriptor instead of using an external tool.  The APIs should appear
to work exactly the same (thanks Thomas Schmitt).

You can now force the appliance to use KVM or fail if not supported
(Sam Eiderman).

Because of a change to XFS in version 5, disabling lazy-counters no
longer works.  The API still works for earlier versions of XFS (Laszlo
Ersek).

=head2 Build changes

The build now uses and requires PCRE2 (instead of PCRE).

This version requires libvirt E<ge> 7.1.0, if libvirt is enabled.

gnulib is no longer bundled with libguestfs, making builds from git
much simpler.

Perl C<Sys::Virt> (libvirt bindings for Perl) are no longer required
by libguestfs.

The code has been compiled with both LTO and GCC I<-fanalyzer> and
many bugs and warnings fixed.

Allow projects like guestfs-tools and virt-v2v to be compiled with
locally built (but not installed) libguestfs (Laszlo Ersek).

Tests now run in parallel (many additional fixes by Laszlo Ersek).

Work around RAID0 regression in Linux 3.14/5.4 (Laszlo Ersek).

Support for RISC-V (Heinrich Schuchardt).

Support for building on Alma and Cloud Linux (Александр Кравченко).

Fix to compile with OCaml 4.12.

The tarball no longer includes the F<ChangeLog> file.  To get a
detailed changelog, please look at the upstream git repository.

Don't assume bash in the F<./configure> script (Martin Kletzander).

Fix F<./configure --with-distro> option (Alexandre Iooss).

Various fixes for qemu 6.1.

Fix creating appliance dependencies on Debian (Hilko Bengen).

Update appliance packages on SUSE and several other improvements to
the init script (Olaf Hering).

=head2 Internals

We now use the qemu / libvirt feature I<-cpu max> to select the best
CPU to run the appliance.  This should improve performance for things
like encrypted disks (Daniel Berrangé).

When passing the appliance filesystem UUID to supermin we now read it
directly out of the appliance instead of using the L<file(1)> program.
This is more reliable, especially as file often breaks or changed
its output.

The qemu I<-enable-fips> option is no longer used.  It was not needed
and has been deprecated by qemu.

On Fedora, pull in glibc-gconv-extra to fix the C<guestfs_syslinux>
API (Yongkui Guo).

We no longer use qemu's sga (Serial Graphics Adapter) option ROM,
instead using the equivalent seabios feature.

=head2 Bugs fixed

=begin comment

https_proxy= ./bugs-in-changelog.sh v1.44.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2002325>

Use -machine graphics=off instead of sga device

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/2001636>

[RFE] libguestfs: Add detection of AlmaLinux and CloudLinux

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1997446>

osinfo is not correct when handling windows server 2022 image

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1990720>

syslinux: failed to create ldlinux.sys

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1985912>

The lstatns function has a memory leak. (python3)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1960217>

[Regression] ls: cannot read symbolic link after running guestmount

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1949683>

virt-v2v: error: inspection could not detect the source guest (or physical  machine)

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1938982>

Move libguestfs from PCRE to PCRE2

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1930996>

[Regression] lvcreate fails to wipe signatures again

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1930133>

Virt-v2v can't convert rhel8 guest whose usr partition is independent

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1915646>

libguestfs-1.44.0 - guestfs appliance path broken

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1911177>

virt-builder + virt-install creates a VM that cannot boot fedora 33

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1766487>

libguestfs assumes rpmdb is in Berkeley DB format

=item L<https://bugzilla.redhat.com/1409024>

[Debian] Missing db_dump abort inspection

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfs-examples(1)>,
L<guestfs-faq(1)>,
L<guestfs-performance(1)>,
L<guestfs-recipes(1)>,
L<guestfs-testing(1)>,
L<guestfs(3)>,
L<guestfish(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

=head1 AUTHORS

=begin comment

git shortlog -s v1.44.0..

=end comment

=over 4

=item Alexandre Iooss

=item Daniel P. Berrangé

=item Heinrich Schuchardt

=item Hilko Bengen

=item Laszlo Ersek

=item Martin Kletzander

=item Remi Collet

=item Richard W.M. Jones

=item Sam Eiderman

=back

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2009-2023 Red Hat Inc.
