=head1 NAME

libguestfs-tools.conf - configuration file for guestfish, guestmount, virt-rescue

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 /etc/libguestfs-tools.conf

 $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/libguestfs/libguestfs-tools.conf

 $HOME/.libguestfs-tools.rc

 $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/libguestfs/libguestfs-tools.conf

=head1 DESCRIPTION

F<libguestfs-tools.conf> (or F<$HOME/.libguestfs-tools.rc>) changes the
defaults for the following programs only:

=over 4

=item *

L<guestfish(1)>

=item *

L<guestmount(1)>

=item *

L<virt-rescue(1)>

=back

There is currently only one setting which is controlled by this
file.  Adding (or uncommenting):

 read_only = true;

changes these programs so they act as if the I<--ro> flag was given on
the command line.  You can use this to make the programs safe against
accidental modification of a live guest (users would have to
explicitly add the I<--rw> flag to modify guests).  This is not the
default because it is not backwards compatible.
See also L<guestfish(1)/OPENING DISKS FOR READ AND WRITE>.

Note that B<the semicolon is required>.

This file is parsed by the libconfig library.  For more information
about the format, see:
L<http://www.hyperrealm.com/libconfig/libconfig_manual.html>

=head1 FILE LOCATION

The order of the configuration files being read is, by importance:

=over 4

=item *

$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/libguestfs/libguestfs-tools.conf (C<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME> is
F<$HOME/.config> if not set).

=item *

$HOME/.libguestfs-tools.rc

=item *

$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/libguestfs/libguestfs-tools.conf (where C<$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS>
means any of the directories in that environment variable, or just F</etc/xdg>
if not set)

=item *

/etc/libguestfs-tools.conf

=back

This means local users can override the system configuration by copying
the configuration file (or creating it anew) into
F<$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/libguestfs/libguestfs-tools.conf>.

F</etc/libguestfs-tools.conf> and F<$HOME/.libguestfs-tools.rc> are the old
non-XDG paths which are read for compatibility.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfish(1)/OPENING DISKS FOR READ AND WRITE>,
L<guestmount(1)>,
L<virt-rescue(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>,
L<http://standards.freedesktop.org/basedir-spec/latest/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2011-2023 Red Hat Inc.
