=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

virt-tar-in - Unpack a tarball into a virtual machine disk image.

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 virt-tar-in -a disk.img data.tar /destination

 virt-tar-in -d domain data.tar /destination

 zcat data.tar.gz | virt-tar-in -d domain - /destination

=head1 WARNING

Using C<virt-tar-in> on live virtual machines can be dangerous,
potentially causing disk corruption.  The virtual machine must be shut
down before you use this command.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

C<virt-tar-in> unpacks an uncompressed tarball into a virtual machine
disk image or named libvirt domain.

The first parameter is the tar file.  Use C<-> to read the tar file
from standard input.  The second parameter is the absolute target
directory to unpack into.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Upload a home directory to a guest:

 virt-tar-in -d MyGuest homes.tar /home

=head1 JUST A SHELL SCRIPT WRAPPER AROUND GUESTFISH

This command is just a simple shell script wrapper around the
L<guestfish(1)> C<tar-in> command.  For anything more complex than a
trivial copy, you are probably better off using guestfish directly.

=head1 OPTIONS

Since the shell script just passes options straight to guestfish, read
L<guestfish(1)> to see the full list of options.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<guestfish(1)>,
L<virt-cat(1)>,
L<virt-copy-in(1)>,
L<virt-copy-out(1)>,
L<virt-edit(1)>,
L<virt-make-fs(1)>,
L<virt-tar-out(1)>,
L<http://libguestfs.org/>.

=head1 AUTHORS

Richard W.M. Jones (C<rjones at redhat dot com>)

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2011 Red Hat Inc.
L<http://libguestfs.org/>

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
